<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>May 1660</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-5" epub:type="chapter z3998:diary">
			<h2 epub:type="title">May 1660</h2>
			<article id="entry-1660-5-11" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-05-11">May 1st</time>. This morning I was told how the people of Deale have set up two or three Maypoles, and have hung up their flags upon the top of them, and do resolve to be very merry today. It being a very pleasant day, I wished myself in Hide Park.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-389" id="noteref-389" epub:type="noteref">389</a> This day I do count myself to have had full two years of perfect cure for the stone, for which God of heaven be blessed. This day Captain Parker came on board, and without his expectation I had a commission for him for the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nonsuch</i> frigate<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-390" id="noteref-390" epub:type="noteref">390</a> (he being now in the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Cheriton</i>), for which he gave me a French pistole. Captain <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Cuttance<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-391" id="noteref-391" epub:type="noteref">391</a> has commission for the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Cheriton</i>. After dinner to ninepins, and won something. The rest of the afternoon in my cabin writing and piping. While we were at supper we heard a great noise upon the Quarter Deck, so we all rose instantly, and found it was to save the coxon of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Cheriton</i>, who, dropping overboard, could not be saved, but was drowned. Today I put on my suit that was altered from the great skirts to little ones. Today I hear they were very merry at Deale, setting up the King’s flag upon one of their maypoles, and drinking his health upon their knees in the streets, and firing the guns, which the soldiers of the Castle threatened; but durst not oppose.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-5-12" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-05-12">2nd</time>. In the morning at a breakfast of radishes at the Purser’s cabin. After that to writing till dinner. At which time comes Dunne from London, with letters that tell us the welcome news of the Parliament’s votes yesterday, which will be remembered for the happiest Maiday that hath been many a year to England. The King’s letter was read in the House, wherein he submits himself and all things to them, as to an Act of Oblivion to all,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-392" id="noteref-392" epub:type="noteref">392</a> unless they shall please to except any, as to the confirming of the sales of the King’s and Church lands, if they see good. The House upon reading the letter, ordered £50,000 to be forthwith provided to send to His Majesty for his present supply; and a committee chosen to return an answer of thanks to His Majesty for his gracious letter; and that the letter be kept among the records of the Parliament; and in all this not so much as one <abbr class="eoc">No.</abbr> So that Luke Robinson<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-393" id="noteref-393" epub:type="noteref">393</a> himself stood up and made a recantation for what he had done, and promises to be a loyal subject to his Prince for the time to come. The City of London have put a Declaration, wherein they do disclaim their owing any other government but that of a King, Lords, and Commons. Thanks was given by the House to Sir John Greenville,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-394" id="noteref-394" epub:type="noteref">394</a> one of the bedchamber to the King, who brought the letter, and they continued bare all the time it was reading. Upon notice made from the Lords to the Commons, of their desire that the Commons would join with them in their vote for King, Lords, and Commons; the Commons did concur and voted that all books whatever that are out against the Government of King, Lords, and Commons, should be brought into the House and burned. Great joy all yesterday at London, and at night more bonfires than ever, and ringing of bells, and drinking of the King’s health upon their knees in the streets, which methinks is a little too much. But everybody seems to be very joyful in the business, insomuch that our sea-commanders now begin to say so too, which a week ago they would not do.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-395" id="noteref-395" epub:type="noteref">395</a> And our seamen, as many as had money or credit for drink, did do nothing else this evening. This day came <abbr>Mr.</abbr> North<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-396" id="noteref-396" epub:type="noteref">396</a> (Sir Dudley North’s son) on board, to spend a little time here, which my Lord was a little troubled at, but he seems to be a fine gentleman, and at night did play his part exceeding well at first sight. After music I went up to the Captain’s Cabin with him and Lieutenant Ferrers, who came hither today from London to bring this news to my Lord, and after a bottle of wine we all to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-5-13" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-05-13">3rd</time>. This morning my Lord showed me the King’s declaration and his letter to the two Generals to be communicated to the fleet.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-397" id="noteref-397" epub:type="noteref">397</a> The contents of the letter are his offer of grace to all that will come in within forty days, only excepting them that the Parliament shall hereafter except. That the sales of lands during these troubles, and all other things, shall be left to the Parliament, by which he will stand. The letter dated at Breda, April 4 1660, in the 12th year of his reign. Upon the receipt of it this morning by an express, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Phillips, one of the messengers of the Council from General Monk, my Lord summoned a council of war, and in the meantime did dictate to me how he would have the vote ordered which he would have pass this council. Which done, the Commanders all came on board, and the council sat in the coach (the first council of war that had been in my time), where I read the letter and declaration; and while they were discoursing upon it, I seemed to draw up a vote, which being offered, they passed. Not one man seemed to say no to it, though I am confident many in their hearts were against it. After this was done, I went up to the quarterdeck with my Lord and the Commanders, and there read both the papers and the vote; which done, and demanding their opinion, the seamen did all of them cry out, “God bless King Charles!” with the greatest joy imaginable. That being done, Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Stayner, who had invited us yesterday, took all the Commanders and myself on board him to dinner, which not being ready, I went with Captain Hayward to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Plimouth</i> and <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Essex</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-398" id="noteref-398" epub:type="noteref">398</a> and did what I had to do there and returned, where very merry at dinner. After dinner, to the rest of the ships (stayed at the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Assistance</i> to hear the harper a good while) quite through the fleet. Which was a very brave sight to visit all the ships, and to be received with the respect and honour that I was on board them all; and much more to see the great joy that I brought to all men; not one through the whole fleet showing the least dislike of the business. In the evening as I was going on board the Vice-Admiral, the General began to fire his guns, which he did all that he had in the ship, and so did all the rest of the Commanders, which was very gallant, and to hear the bullets go hissing over our heads as we were in the boat. This done and finished my Proclamation, I returned to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nazeby</i>, where my Lord was much pleased to hear how all the fleet took it in a transport of joy, showed me a private letter of the King’s to him, and another from the Duke of York in such familiar style as to their common friend, with all kindness imaginable. And I found by the letters, and so my Lord told me too, that there had been many letters passed between them for a great while, and I perceive unknown to Monk. And among the rest that had carried these letters Sir John Boys is one, and that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Norwood, which had a ship to carry him over the other day, when my Lord would not have me put down his name in the book. The King speaks of his being courted to come to the Hague, but do desire my Lord’s advice whither to come to take ship. And the Duke offers to learn the seaman’s trade of him, in such familiar words as if Jack Cole and I had writ them. This was very strange to me, that my Lord should carry all things so wisely and prudently as he do, and I was over joyful to see him in so good condition, and he did not a little please himself to tell me how he had provided for himself so great a hold on the King.</p>
				<p>After this to supper, and then to writing of letters till twelve at night, and so up again at three in the morning. My Lord seemed to put great confidence in me, and would take my advice in many things. I perceive his being willing to do all the honour in the world to Monk, and to let him have all the honour of doing the business, though he will many times express his thoughts of him to be but a thick-skulled fool. So that I do believe there is some agreement more than ordinary between the King and my Lord to let Monk carry on the business, for it is he that must do the business, or at least that can hinder it, if he be not flattered and observed. This, my Lord will hint himself sometimes. My Lord, I perceive by the King’s letter, had writ to him about his father, Crew<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-399" id="noteref-399" epub:type="noteref">399</a> and the King did speak well of him; but my Lord tells me, that he is afeard that he hath too much concerned himself with the Presbyterians against the House of Lords, which will do him a great discourtesy.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-5-14" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-05-14">4th</time>. I wrote this morning many letters, and to all the copies of the vote of the council of war I put my name, that if it should come in print my name may be at it. I sent a copy of the vote to Doling, enclosed in this letter:</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<p epub:type="z3998:recipient">“Sir,</p>
					<p>“He that can fancy a fleet (like ours) in her pride, with pendants loose, guns roaring, caps flying, and the loud ‘<i xml:lang="fr">Vive le Roys</i>,’ echoed from one ship’s company to another, he, and he only, can apprehend the joy this enclosed vote was received with, or the blessing he thought himself possessed of that bore it, and is</p>
					<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">“Your humble servant.”</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>About nine o’clock I got all my letters done, and sent them by the messenger that came yesterday. This morning came Captain Isham on board with a gentleman going to the King, by whom very cunningly, my Lord tells me, he intends to send an account of this day’s and yesterday’s actions here, notwithstanding he had writ to the Parliament to have leave of them to send the King the answer of the fleet. Since my writing of the last paragraph, my Lord called me to him to read his letter to the King, to see whether I could find any slips in it or no. And as much of the letter<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-400" id="noteref-400" epub:type="noteref">400</a> as I can remember, is thus:</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
					<p>“<span epub:type="z3998:salutation">May it please your Most Excellent Majesty</span>,” and so begins.</p>
					<p>“That he yesterday received from General Monk his Majesty’s letter and direction; and that General Monk had desired him to write to the Parliament to have leave to send the vote of the seamen before he did send it to him, which he had done by writing to both Speakers; but for his private satisfaction he had sent it thus privately (and so the copy of the proceedings yesterday was sent him), and that this come by a gentleman that came this day on board, intending to wait upon his Majesty, that he is my Lord’s countryman, and one whose friends have suffered much on his Majesty’s behalf. That my Lords Pembroke<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-401" id="noteref-401" epub:type="noteref">401</a> and Salisbury<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-402" id="noteref-402" epub:type="noteref">402</a> are put out of the House of Lords. That my Lord is very joyful that other countries do pay him the civility and respect due to him; and that he do much rejoice to see that the King do resolve to receive none of their assistance (or some such words), from them, he having strength enough in the love and loyalty of his own subjects to support him. That his Majesty had chosen the best place, Scheveling<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-403" id="noteref-403" epub:type="noteref">403</a> for his embarking, and that there is nothing in the world of which he is more ambitious, than to have the honour of attending his Majesty, which he hoped would be speedy. That he had commanded the vessel to attend at Helversluce<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-404" id="noteref-404" epub:type="noteref">404</a> till this gentleman returns, that so if his Majesty do not think it fit to command the fleet himself, yet that he may be there to receive his commands and bring them to his Lordship. He ends his letter, that he is confounded with the thoughts of the high expressions of love to him in the King’s letter, and concludes,</p>
					<footer>
						<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">“Your most loyal, dutiful, faithful and obedient subject and servant,</p>
						<p epub:type="z3998:signature z3998:sender">“<abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. M.</abbr>”</p>
					</footer>
				</blockquote>
				<p>The rest of the afternoon at ninepins. In the evening came a packet from London, among the rest a letter from my wife, which tells me that she has not been well, which did exceedingly trouble me, but my Lord sending <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cook at night, I wrote to her and sent a piece of gold enclosed to her, and wrote also to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowyer, and enclosed a half piece to her for a token. After supper at the table in the coach, my Lord talking concerning the uncertainty of the places of the Exchequer to them that had them now; he did at last think of an office which do belong to him in case the King do restore every man to his places that ever had been patent, which is to be one of the clerks of the signet, which will be a fine employment for one of his sons. After all this discourse we broke up and to bed.</p>
				<p>In the afternoon came a minister on board, one <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sharpe, who is going to the King; who tells me that Commissioners are chosen both of Lords and Commons to go to the King; and that <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Clarges<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-405" id="noteref-405" epub:type="noteref">405</a> is going to him from the Army, and that he will be here tomorrow. My letters at night tell me, that the House did deliver their letter to Sir John Greenville, in answer to the King’s sending, and that they give him £500 for his pains, to buy him a jewel, and that besides the £50,000 ordered to be borrowed of the City for the present use of the King, the twelve companies of the City do give every one of them to his Majesty, as a present, £1,000.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-5-15" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-05-15">5th</time>. All the morning very busy writing letters to London, and a packet to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing, to acquaint him with what had been done lately in the fleet. And this I did by my Lord’s command, who, I thank him, did of himself think of doing it, to do me a kindness, for he writ a letter himself to him, thanking him for his kindness to me. All the afternoon at ninepins, at night after supper good music, my Lord, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> North, I and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Howe. After that to bed. This evening came <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Clarges to Deale, going to the King; where the townspeople strewed the streets with herbs against his coming, for joy of his going. Never was there so general a content as there is now. I cannot but remember that our parson did, in his prayer tonight, pray for the long life and happiness of our King and dread Sovereign, that may last as long as the sun and moon endureth.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-5-16" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-05-16">6th (Lord’s day)</time>. This morning while we were at sermon comes in <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Clarges and a dozen gentlemen to see my Lord, who, after sermon, dined with him; I remember that last night upon discourse concerning Clarges my Lord told me that he was a man of small <i xml:lang="es">entendimiento</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-406" id="noteref-406" epub:type="noteref">406</a> This afternoon there was a gentleman with me, an officer of Dunkirk going over, who came to me for an order and told me he was lately with my uncle and Aunt Fenner and that Kate’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-407" id="noteref-407" epub:type="noteref">407</a> fits of the convulsions did hold her still. It fell very well today, a stranger preached here for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ibbot, one <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Stanley, who prayed for King Charles, by the Grace of God, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, which gave great contentment to the gentlemen that were on board here, and they said they would talk of it, when they come to Breda, as not having it done yet in London so publicly. After they were gone from on board, my Lord writ a letter to the King and give it to me to carry privately to Sir William Compton on board the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Assistance</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-408" id="noteref-408" epub:type="noteref">408</a> which I did, and after a health to his Majesty on board there, I left them under sail for Breda. Back again and found them at sermon. I went up to my cabin and looked over my accounts, and find that, all my debts paid and my preparations to sea paid for, I have £40 clear in my purse. After supper to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-5-17" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-05-17">7th</time>. This morning Captain Cuttance sent me 12 bottles of Margate ale. Three of them I drank presently with some friends in the Coach. My Lord went this morning about the flagships in a boat, to see what alterations there must be, as to the arms and flags. He did give me order also to write for silk flags and scarlet waistclothes.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-409" id="noteref-409" epub:type="noteref">409</a> For a rich barge; for a noise of trumpets,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-410" id="noteref-410" epub:type="noteref">410</a> and a set of fiddlers. Very great deal of company come today, among others <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bellasses,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-411" id="noteref-411" epub:type="noteref">411</a> Sir Thomas Lenthropp,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-412" id="noteref-412" epub:type="noteref">412</a> Sir Henry Chichley, Colonel Philip Honiwood,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-413" id="noteref-413" epub:type="noteref">413</a> and Captain Titus,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-414" id="noteref-414" epub:type="noteref">414</a> the last of whom my Lord showed all our cabins, and I suppose he is to take notice what room there will be for the King’s entertainment. Here were also all the Jurates of the town of Dover<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-415" id="noteref-415" epub:type="noteref">415</a> come to give my Lord a visit, and after dinner all went away. I could not but observe that the Vice-Admiral after dinner came into the great cabin below, where the Jurates and I and the commanders for want of room dined, and there told us we must drink a health to the King, and himself called for a bottle of wine, and begun his and the Duke of York’s. In the afternoon I lost 5<abbr>s.</abbr> at ninepins. After supper music, and to bed. Having also among us at the Coach table wrote a letter to the French ambassador, in French, about the release of a ship we had taken. After I was in bed <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Howe came and sat in my cabin, where I gave them three bottles of Margate ale, and sat laughing and very merry, till almost one o’clock in the morning, and so good night.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-5-18" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-05-18">8th</time>. All the morning busy. After dinner come several persons of honour, as my Lord <abbr>St.</abbr> John and others, for convoy to Flushing, and great giving of them salutes. My Lord and we at ninepins: I lost 9<abbr>s.</abbr> While we were at play <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cook brings me word of my wife. He went to Huntsmore to see her, and brought her and my father Bowyer to London, where he left her at my father’s, very well, and speaks very well of her love to me. My letters today tell me how it was intended that the King should be proclaimed today in London, with a great deal of pomp. I had also news who they are that are chosen of the Lords and Commons to attend the King. And also the whole story of what we did the other day in the fleet, at reading of the King’s declaration, and my name at the bottom of it. After supper some music and to bed. I resolving to rise betimes tomorrow to write letters to London.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-5-19" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-05-19">9th</time>. Up very early, writing a letter to the King, as from the two Generals of the fleet, in answer to his letter to them, wherein my Lord do give most humble thanks for his gracious letter and declaration; and promises all duty and obedience to him. This letter was carried this morning to Sir Peter Killigrew,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-416" id="noteref-416" epub:type="noteref">416</a> who came hither this morning early to bring an order from the Lords’ House to my Lord, giving him power to write an answer to the King. This morning my Lord <abbr>St.</abbr> John and other persons of honour were here to see my Lord, and so away to Flushing. After they were gone my Lord and I to write letters to London, which we sent by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cook, who was very desirous to go because of seeing my wife before she went out of town. As we were sitting down to dinner, in comes Noble with a letter from the House of Lords to my Lord, to desire him to provide ships to transport the Commissioners to the King, which are expected here this week. He brought us certain news that the King was proclaimed yesterday with great pomp, and brought down one of the Proclamations, with great joy to us all; for which God be praised. After dinner to ninepins and lost 5<abbr>s.</abbr> This morning came <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Saunderson,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-417" id="noteref-417" epub:type="noteref">417</a> that writ the story of the King, hither, who is going over to the King. He calls me cousin and seems a very knowing man. After supper to bed betimes, leaving my Lord talking in the Coach with the Captain.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-5-20" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-05-20">10th</time>. This morning came on board <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pinkney and his son, going to the King with a petition finely writ by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Whore, for to be the King’s embroiderer; for whom and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Saunderson I got a ship. This morning come my Lord Winchelsea<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-418" id="noteref-418" epub:type="noteref">418</a> and a great deal of company, and dined here. In the afternoon, while my Lord and we were at music in the great cabin below, comes in a messenger to tell us that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Edward Montagu,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-419" id="noteref-419" epub:type="noteref">419</a> my Lord’s son, was come to Deale, who afterwards came on board with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pickering with him. The child was sick in the evening. At night, while my Lord was at supper, in comes my Lord Lauderdale<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-420" id="noteref-420" epub:type="noteref">420</a> and Sir John Greenville, who supped here, and so went away. After they were gone, my Lord called me into his cabin, and told me how he was commanded to set sail presently for the King,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-421" id="noteref-421" epub:type="noteref">421</a> and was very glad thereof, and so put me to writing of letters and other work that night till it was very late, he going to bed. I got him afterwards to sign things in bed. After I had done some more work I to bed also.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-5-21" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-05-21">11th</time>. Up very early in the morning, and so about a great deal of business in order to our going hence today. Burr going on shore last night made me very angry. So that I sent for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pitts<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-422" id="noteref-422" epub:type="noteref">422</a> to come to me from the Vice-Admiral’s, intending not to have employed Burr any more. But Burr by and by coming and desiring humbly that I would forgive him and Pitts not coming I did set him to work. This morning we began to pull down all the State’s arms in the fleet, having first sent to Dover for painters and others to come to set up the King’s.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-423" id="noteref-423" epub:type="noteref">423</a> The rest of the morning writing of letters to London which I afterwards sent by Dunne. I had this morning my first opportunity of discoursing with <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Clarke,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-424" id="noteref-424" epub:type="noteref">424</a> whom I found to be a very pretty man and very knowing. He is now going in this ship to the King. There dined here my Lord Crafford<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-425" id="noteref-425" epub:type="noteref">425</a> and my Lord Cavendish,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-426" id="noteref-426" epub:type="noteref">426</a> and other Scotchmen whom I afterwards ordered to be received on board the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Plymouth</i>, and to go along with us. After dinner we set sail from the Downs, I leaving my boy to go to Deale for my linen. In the afternoon overtook us three or four gentlemen; two of the Berties,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-427" id="noteref-427" epub:type="noteref">427</a> and one <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dormerhoy,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-428" id="noteref-428" epub:type="noteref">428</a> a Scotch gentleman, whom I afterwards found to be a very fine man, who, telling my Lord that they heard the Commissioners were come out of London today, my Lord dropped anchor over against Dover Castle (which give us about thirty guns in passing), and upon a high debate with the Vice and Rear Admiral whether it were safe to go and not stay for the Commissioners, he did resolve to send Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Stayner to Dover, to enquire of my Lord Winchelsea, whether or no they are come out of London, and then to resolve tomorrow morning of going or not; which was done. It blew very hard all this night that I was afeard of my boy. About 11 at night came the boats from Deale, with great store of provisions, by the same token John Goods told me that above 20 of the fowls are smothered, but my boy was put on board the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Northwich</i>. To bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-5-22" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-05-22">12th</time>. This morning I inquired for my boy, whether he was come well or no, and it was told me that he was well in bed. My Lord called me to his chamber, he being in bed, and gave me many orders to make for direction for the ships that are left in the Downs, giving them the greatest charge in the world to bring no passengers with them, when they come after us to Scheveling Bay, excepting <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Edward Montagu, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thomas Crew, and Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Wright. Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Stayner hath been here early in the morning and told my Lord, that my Lord Winchelsea understands by letters, that the Commissioners are only to come to Dover to attend the coming over of the King. So my Lord did give order for weighing anchor, which we did, and sailed all day. In our way in the morning, coming in the midway between Dover and Calais, we could see both places very easily, and very pleasant it was to me that the further we went the more we lost sight of both lands. In the afternoon at cards with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> North and the Doctor.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-429" id="noteref-429" epub:type="noteref">429</a> There by us, in the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Lark</i> frigate,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-430" id="noteref-430" epub:type="noteref">430</a> Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Freeman and some others, going from the King to England, come to see my Lord and so onward on their voyage. In the afternoon upon the quarterdeck the Doctor told <abbr>Mr.</abbr> North and me an admirable story called <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Fruitless Precaution</i>, an exceeding pretty story and worthy my getting without book when I can get the book. This evening came <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply on board, whom we had left at Deale and Dover getting of provision and borrowing of money. In the evening late, after discoursing with the Doctor, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-5-23" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-05-23">13th (Lord’s day)</time>. Trimmed in the morning, after that to the cook’s room with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply, the first time that I was there this voyage. Then to the quarterdeck, upon which the tailors and painters were at work, cutting out some pieces of yellow cloth into the fashion of a crown and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. R.</abbr> and put it upon a fine sheet, and that into the flag instead of the State’s arms, which after dinner was finished and set up after it had been shown to my Lord, who took physic today and was in his chamber, and liked it so well as to bid me give the tailors 20<abbr>s.</abbr> among them for doing of it. This morn Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Boys and <abbr>Capt.</abbr> Isham met us in the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nonsuch</i>, the first of whom, after a word or two with my Lord, went forward, the other stayed. I heard by them how <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing had never made any address to the King, and for that was hated exceedingly by the Court, and that he was in a Dutch ship which sailed by us, then going to England with disgrace. Also how <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Morland<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-431" id="noteref-431" epub:type="noteref">431</a> was knighted by the King this week, and that the King did give the reason of it openly, that it was for his giving him intelligence all the time he was clerk to Secretary Thurloe. In the afternoon a council of war, only to acquaint them that the Harp must be taken out of all their flags,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-432" id="noteref-432" epub:type="noteref">432</a> it being very offensive to the King. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cook, who came after us in the Yarmouth, bringing me a letter from my wife and a Latin letter from my brother John, with both of which I was exceedingly pleased. No sermon all day, we being under sail, only at night prayers, wherein <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ibbott prayed for all that were related to us in a spiritual and fleshly way. We came within sight of Middle’s shore. Late at night we writ letters to the King of the news of our coming, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Edward Pickering carried them. <abbr>Capt.</abbr> Isham went on shore, nobody showing of him any respect; so the old man very fairly took leave of my Lord, and my Lord very coldly bid him “God be with you,” which was very strange, but that I hear that he keeps a great deal of prating and talking on shore, on board, at the King’s Courts, what command he had with my Lord, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> After letters were gone then to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-5-24" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-05-24">14th</time>. In the morning when I woke and rose, I saw myself out of the scuttle close by the shore, which afterwards I was told to be the Dutch shore; the Hague was clearly to be seen by us. My Lord went up in his nightgown into the cuddy,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-433" id="noteref-433" epub:type="noteref">433</a> to see how to dispose thereof for himself and us that belong to him, to give order for our removal today. Some nasty Dutchmen came on board to proffer their boats to carry things from us on shore, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, to get money by us. Before noon some gentlemen came on board from the shore to kiss my Lord’s hands. And by and by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> North and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Clerke went to kiss the Queen of Bohemia’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-434" id="noteref-434" epub:type="noteref">434</a> hands, from my Lord, with twelve attendants from on board to wait on them, among which I sent my boy, who, like myself, is with child to see any strange thing. After noon they came back again after having kissed the Queen of Bohemia’s hand, and were sent again by my Lord to do the same to the Prince of Orange.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-435" id="noteref-435" epub:type="noteref">435</a> So I got the Captain to ask leave for me to go, which my Lord did give, and I taking my boy and Judge Advocate<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-436" id="noteref-436" epub:type="noteref">436</a> with me, went in company with them. The weather bad; we were sadly washed when we came near the shore, it being very hard to land there. The shore is, as all the country between that and the Hague, all sand. The rest of the company got a coach by themselves; <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed and I went in the fore part of a coach wherein were two very pretty ladies, very fashionable and with black patches, who very merrily sang all the way and that very well, and were very free to kiss the two blades that were with them. I took out my flageolet and piped, but in piping I dropped my rapier-stick, but when I came to the Hague, I sent my boy back again for it and he found it, for which I did give him 6<abbr>d.</abbr>, but some horses had gone over it and broke the scabbard. The Hague is a most neat place in all respects. The houses so neat in all places and things as is possible. Here we walked up and down a great while, the town being now very full of Englishmen, for that the Londoners were come on shore today. But going to see the Prince<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-437" id="noteref-437" epub:type="noteref">437</a> he was gone forth with his governor, and so we walked up and down the town and court to see the place; and by the help of a stranger, an Englishman, we saw a great many places, and were made to understand many things, as the intention of maypoles, which we saw there standing at every great man’s door, of different greatness according to the quality of the person. About 10 at night the Prince comes home, and we found an easy admission. His attendance very inconsiderable as for a prince; but yet handsome, and his tutor a fine man, and himself a very pretty boy. It was bright moonshine tonight. This done we went to a place we had taken to sup in, where a sallet and two or three bones of mutton were provided for a matter of ten of us which was very strange. After supper the Judge and I to another house, leaving them there, and he and I lay in one press bed, there being two more in the same room, but all very neat and handsome, my boy sleeping upon a bench by me.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-5-25" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-05-25">15th</time>. We lay till past three o’clock, then up and down the town, to see it by daylight, where we saw the soldiers of the Prince’s guard, all very fine, and the burghers of the town with their arms and muskets as bright as silver. And meeting this morning a schoolmaster that spoke good English and French, he went along with us and showed us the whole town, and indeed I cannot speak enough of the gallantry of the town. Everybody of fashion speaks French or Latin, or both. The women many of them very pretty and in good habits, fashionable and black spots. He went with me to buy a couple of baskets, one of them for <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Pierce, the other for my wife. After he was gone, we having first drank with him at our lodging, the judge and I to the Grande Salle where we were showed the place where the States General sit in council. The hall is a great place, where the flags that they take from their enemies are all hung up; and things to be sold, as in Westminster Hall, and not much unlike it, but that not so big, but much neater. After that to a bookseller’s and bought for the love of the binding three books: the French Psalms in four parts, Bacon’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Organon</i>, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Farnab.</abbr> <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr class="eoc">Rhetor.</abbr></i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-438" id="noteref-438" epub:type="noteref">438</a> After that the judge, I and my boy by coach to Scheveling again, where we went into a house of entertainment and drank there, the wind being very high, and we saw two boats overset and the gallants forced to be pulled on shore by the heels, while their trunks, portmanteaus, hats, and feathers, were swimming in the sea. Among others I saw the ministers that come along with the Commissioners (<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Case among the rest) sadly dipped.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-439" id="noteref-439" epub:type="noteref">439</a> So they came in where we were, and I being in haste left my Copenhagen knife, and so lost it. Having stayed here a great while a gentleman that was going to kiss my Lord’s hand, from the Queen of Bohemia, and I hired a Dutch boat for four rixdollars to carry us on board. We were fain to wait a great while before we could get off from the shore, the sea being very rough. The Dutchman would fain have made all pay that came into our boat besides us two and our company, there being many of our ship’s company got in who were on shore, but some of them had no money, having spent all on shore. Coming on board we found all the Commissioners of the House of Lords at dinner with my Lord, who after dinner went away for shore. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Morland, now Sir Samuel, was here on board, but I do not find that my Lord or anybody did give him any respect, he being looked upon by him and all men as a knave. Among others he betrayed Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Rich.</abbr> Willis<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-440" id="noteref-440" epub:type="noteref">440</a> that married <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">F.</abbr> Jones’s daughter, that he had paid him £1,000 at one time by the Protector’s and Secretary Thurloe’s order, for intelligence that he sent concerning the King. In the afternoon my Lord called me on purpose to show me his fine clothes which are now come hither, and indeed are very rich as gold and silver can make them, only his sword he and I do not like. In the afternoon my Lord and I walked together in the coach two hours, talking together upon all sorts of discourse: as religion, wherein he is, I perceive, wholly sceptical, as well as I, saying, that indeed the Protestants as to the Church of Rome are wholly fanatics: he likes uniformity and form of prayer; about State-business, among other things he told me that his conversion to the King’s cause (for so I was saying that I wondered from what time the King could look upon him to become his friend), commenced from his being in the Sound, when he found what usage he was likely to have from a Commonwealth. My Lord, the Captain, and I supped in my Lord’s chamber, where I did perceive that he did begin to show me much more respect than ever he did yet. After supper, my Lord sent for me, intending to have me play at cards with him, but I not knowing cribbage, we fell into discourse of many things, till it was so rough sea and the ship rolled so much that I was not able to stand, and so he bid me go to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-5-26" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-05-26">16th</time>. Soon as I was up I went down to be trimmed below in the great cabin, but then come in some with visits, among the rest one from Admiral Opdam,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-441" id="noteref-441" epub:type="noteref">441</a> who spoke Latin well, but not French nor English, to whom my Lord made me to give his answer and to entertain; he brought my Lord a tierce of wine and a barrel of butter, as a present from the Admiral. After that to finish my trimming, and while I was doing of it in comes <abbr>Mr.</abbr> North very seasick from shore, and to bed he goes. After that to dinner, where Commissioner Pett<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-442" id="noteref-442" epub:type="noteref">442</a> was come to take care to get all things ready for the King on board. My Lord in his best suit, this the first day, in expectation to wait upon the King. But <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Edw.</abbr> Pickering coming from the King brought word that the King would not put my Lord to the trouble of coming to him; but that he would come to the shore to look upon the fleet today, which we expected, and had our guns ready to fire, and our scarlet waistclothes out and silk pendants, but he did not come. My Lord and we at ninepins this afternoon upon the Quarterdeck, which was very pretty sport. This evening came <abbr>Mr.</abbr> John Pickering<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-443" id="noteref-443" epub:type="noteref">443</a> on board, like an ass, with his feathers and new suit that he had made at the Hague. My Lord very angry for his staying on shore, bidding me a little before to send to him, telling me that he was afraid that for his father’s sake he might have some mischief done him, unless he used the General’s name. To supper, and after supper to cards. I stood by and looked on till 11 at night and so to bed. This afternoon <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Edwd.</abbr> Pickering told me in what a sad, poor condition for clothes and money the King was, and all his attendants, when he came to him first from my Lord, their clothes not being worth forty shillings the best of them.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-444" id="noteref-444" epub:type="noteref">444</a> And how overjoyed the King was when Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Greenville brought him some money; so joyful, that he called the Princess Royal<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-445" id="noteref-445" epub:type="noteref">445</a> and Duke of York to look upon it as it lay in the portmanteau before it was taken out. My Lord told me, too, that the Duke of York is made High Admiral of England.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-446" id="noteref-446" epub:type="noteref">446</a></p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-5-27" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-05-27">17th</time>. Up early to write down my last two days’ observations. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Clerke came to me to tell me that he heard this morning, by some Dutch that are come on board already to see the ship, that there was a Portuguese taken yesterday at the Hague, that had a design to kill the King. But this I heard afterwards was only the mistake upon one being observed to walk with his sword naked, he having lost his scabbard. Before dinner <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Edw.</abbr> Pickering and I, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Howe, Pim, and my boy<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-447" id="noteref-447" epub:type="noteref">447</a> to Scheveling, where we took coach, and so to the Hague, where walking, intending to find one that might show us the King incognito, I met with Captain Whittington (that had formerly brought a letter to my Lord from the Mayor of London) and he did promise me to do it, but first we went and dined at a French house, but paid 16<abbr>s.</abbr> for our part of the club. At dinner in came <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Cade, a merry mad parson of the King’s. And they two after dinner got the child and me (the others not being able to crowd in) to see the King, who kissed the child very affectionately. Then we kissed his, and the Duke of York’s, and the Princess Royal’s hands. The King seems to be a very sober man; and a very splendid Court he hath in the number of persons of quality that are about him, English very rich in habit. From the King to the Lord Chancellor,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-448" id="noteref-448" epub:type="noteref">448</a> who did lie bed-rid of the gout: he spoke very merrily to the child and me. After that, going to see the Queen of Bohemia, I met with <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Fuller,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-449" id="noteref-449" epub:type="noteref">449</a> whom I sent to a tavern with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Edw.</abbr> Pickering, while I and the rest went to see the Queen<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-450" id="noteref-450" epub:type="noteref">450</a> who used us very respectfully; her hand we all kissed. She seems a very debonaire, but plain lady. After that to the <abbr>Dr.</abbr>’s, where we drank a while or so. In a coach of a friend’s of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Cade we went to see a house of the Princess Dowager’s in a park about half-a-mile or a mile from the Hague, where there is one, the most beautiful room for pictures in the whole world.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-451" id="noteref-451" epub:type="noteref">451</a> She had here one picture upon the top, with these words, dedicating it to the memory of her husband:⁠—“<i xml:lang="la">Incomparabili marito, inconsolabilis vidua.</i>”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-452" id="noteref-452" epub:type="noteref">452</a> Here I met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Woodcock of Cambridge, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hardy and another, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Woodcock beginning we had two or three fine songs, he and I, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Howe to the Echo, which was very pleasant, and the more because in a heaven of pleasure and in a strange country, that I never was taken up more with a sense of pleasure in my life. After that we parted and back to the Hague and took a tour or two about the Forehault<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-453" id="noteref-453" epub:type="noteref">453</a> where the ladies in the evening do as our ladies do in Hide Park. But for my life I could not find one handsome, but their coaches very rich and themselves so too. From thence, taking leave of the Doctor, we took wagon to Scheveling, where we had a fray with the Boatswain of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Richmond</i>, who would not freely carry us on board, but at last he was willing to it, but then it was so late we durst not go. So we returned between 10 and 11 at night in the dark with a wagon with one horse to the Hague, where being come we went to bed as well as we could be accommodated, and so to sleep.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-5-28" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-05-28">18th</time>. Very early up, and, hearing that the Duke of York, our Lord High Admiral, would go on board today, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pickering and I took wagon for Scheveling, leaving the child in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierce’s hands, with directions to keep him within doors all day till he heard from me. But the wind being very high that no boats could get off from shore, we returned to the Hague (having breakfasted with a gentleman of the Duke’s, and Commissioner Pett, sent on purpose to give notice to my Lord of his coming), where I hear that the child is gone to Delfe<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-454" id="noteref-454" epub:type="noteref">454</a> to see the town. So we all and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ibbott, the Minister, took a <i xml:lang="nl">schuit</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-455" id="noteref-455" epub:type="noteref">455</a> and very much pleased with the manner and conversation of the passengers, where most speak French; went after them, but met them by the way. But however we went forward making no stop. Where when we were come we got a smith’s boy of the town to go along with us, but could speak nothing but Dutch, and he showed us the church where Van Trump lies entombed with a very fine monument. His epitaph concluded thus:⁠—“<i xml:lang="la">Tandem Bello Anglico tantum non victor, certe invictus, vivere et vincere desiit.</i>” There is a sea-fight cut in marble, with the smoke, the best expressed that ever I saw in my life.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-456" id="noteref-456" epub:type="noteref">456</a> From thence to the great church, that stands in a fine great marketplace, over against the Stadt-house, and there I saw a stately tomb of the old Prince of Orange,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-457" id="noteref-457" epub:type="noteref">457</a> of marble and brass; wherein among other rarities there are the angels with their trumpets expressed as it were crying. Here were very fine organs in both the churches. It is a most sweet town, with bridges, and a river in every street. Observing that in every house of entertainment there hangs in every room a poor-man’s box, and desiring to know the reason thereof, it was told me that it is their custom to confirm all bargains by putting something into the poor people’s box, and that binds as fast as anything. We also saw the Guesthouse, where it was very pleasant to see what neat preparation there is for the poor. We saw one poor man a-dying there. After we had seen all, we light by chance of an English house to drink in, where we were very merry, discoursing of the town and the thing that hangs up in the Stadthouse<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-458" id="noteref-458" epub:type="noteref">458</a> like a bushel, which I was told is a sort of punishment for some sort of offenders to carry through the streets of the town over his head, which is a great weight. Back by water, where a pretty sober Dutch lass sat reading all the way, and I could not fasten any discourse upon her. At our landing we met with Commissioner Pett going down to the waterside with Major Harly,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-459" id="noteref-459" epub:type="noteref">459</a> who is going upon a dispatch into England. They having a coach I left the Parson<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-460" id="noteref-460" epub:type="noteref">460</a> and my boy and went along with Commissioner Pett, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ackworth<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-461" id="noteref-461" epub:type="noteref">461</a> and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dawes his friends, to the Princess Dowager’s house again. Thither also my Lord Fairfax and some other English Lords did come to see it, and my pleasure was increased by seeing of it again. Besides we went into the garden, wherein are gallant nuts better than ever I saw, and a fine Echo under the house in a vault made on purpose with pillars, where I played on my flageolet to great advantage. Back to the Hague, where not finding <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Edward, I was much troubled, but went with the Parson to supper to Commissioner Pett, where we sat late. And among other mirth <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ackworth vied wives, each endeavouring to set his own wife out to the best advantage, he having as they said an extraordinary handsome wife. But <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dawes could not be got to say anything of his. After that to our lodging where <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Howe and I exceeding troubled not to know what is become of our young gentleman. So to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-5-29" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-05-29">19th</time>. Up early, hearing nothing of the child, and went to Scheveling, where I found no getting on board, though the Duke of York sent every day to see whether he could do it or no. Here I met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pinkney and his sons, and with them went back to the Hague, in our way ’lighting and going to see a woman that makes pretty rock-work in shells, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, which could I have carried safe I would have bought some of. At the Hague we went to buy some pictures, where I saw a sort of painting done upon woollen cloth, drawn as if there was a curtain over it, which was very pleasant, but dear. Another pretty piece of painting I saw, on which there was a great wager laid by young Pinkney and me whether it was a principal or a copy. But not knowing how to decide, it was broken off, and I got the old man to lay out as much as my piece of gold come to, and so saved my money, which had been 24<abbr>s.</abbr> lost, I fear. While we were here buying of pictures, we saw <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Edward and his company land. Who told me that they had been at Leyden all night, at which I was very angry with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierce, and shall not be friends I believe a good while. To our lodging to dinner. After that out to buy some linen to wear against tomorrow, and so to the barber’s. After that by wagon to Lausdune, where the 365 children were born. We saw the hill where they say the house stood and sunk wherein the children were born. The basins wherein the male and female children were baptized do stand over a large table that hangs upon a wall, with the whole story of the thing in Dutch and Latin, beginning, “Margarita Herman Comitissa,” <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> The thing was done about 200 years ago.</p>
				<p>The town is a little small village which answers much to one of our small villages, such a one as Chesterton in all respects, and one could have thought it in England but for the language of the people. We went into a little drinking house where there were a great many Dutch boors eating of fish in a boorish manner, but very merry in their way. But the houses here as neat as in the great places. From thence to the Hague again playing at crambo<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-462" id="noteref-462" epub:type="noteref">462</a> in the wagon, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Edward, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ibbott, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Howe, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pinkney, and I. When we were come thither <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Howe, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ibbott, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pinckney went away for Scheveling, while I and the child to walk up and down the town, where I met my old chamber-fellow, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Ch.</abbr> Anderson, and a friend of his (both Physicians), <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wright, who took me to a Dutch house, where there was an exceeding pretty lass, and right for the sport, but it being Saturday we could not have much of her company, but however I stayed with them (having left the child with my uncle Pickering,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-463" id="noteref-463" epub:type="noteref">463</a> whom I met in the street) till 12 at night. By that time Charles was almost drunk, and then broke up, he resolving to go thither again, after he had seen me at my lodging, and lie with the girl, which he told me he had done in the morning. Going to my lodging we met with the bellman, who struck upon a clapper, which I took in my hand, and it is just like the clapper that our boys frighten the birds away from the corn with in summer time in England. To bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-5-30" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-05-30">20th</time>. Up early, and with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pickering and the child by wagon to Scheveling, where it not being yet fit to go off, I went to lie down in a chamber in the house, where in another bed there was a pretty Dutch woman in bed alone, but though I had a month’s-mind<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-464" id="noteref-464" epub:type="noteref">464</a> I had not the boldness to go to her. So there I slept an hour or two. At last she rose, and then I rose and walked up and down the chamber, and saw her dress herself after the Dutch dress, and talked to her as much as I could, and took occasion, from her ring which she wore on her first finger, to kiss her hand, but had not the face to offer anything more. So at last I left her there and went to my company. About 8 o’clock I went into the church at Scheveling, which was pretty handsome, and in the chancel a very great upper part of the mouth of a whale, which indeed was of a prodigious bigness, bigger than one of our long boats that belong to one of our ships. Commissioner Pett at last came to our lodging, and caused the boats to go off; so some in one boat and some in another we all bid adieu to the shore. But through badness of weather we were in great danger, and a great while before we could get to the ship, so that of all the company not one but myself that was not sick. I keeping myself in the open air, though I was soundly wet for it. This hath not been known four days together such weather at this time of year, a great while. Indeed our fleet was thought to be in great danger, but we found all well, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Thos.</abbr> Crew came on board. I having spoke a word or two with my Lord, being not very well settled, partly through last night’s drinking and want of sleep, I lay down in my gown upon my bed and slept till the 4 o’clock gun the next morning waked me, which I took for 8 at night, and rising⁠ ⁠… mistook the sun rising for the sun setting on Sunday night.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-5-31" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-05-31">21st</time>. So into my naked bed<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-465" id="noteref-465" epub:type="noteref">465</a> and slept till 9 o’clock, and then John Goods waked me, [by] and by the captain’s boy brought me four barrels of Mallows oysters, which Captain Tatnell had sent me from Murlace.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-466" id="noteref-466" epub:type="noteref">466</a> The weather foul all this day also. After dinner, about writing one thing or other all day, and setting my papers in order, having been so long absent. At night <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierce, Purser (the other Pierce and I having not spoken to one another since we fell out about <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Edward), and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cook sat with me in my cabin and supped with me, and then I went to bed. By letters that came hither in my absence, I understand that the Parliament had ordered all persons to be secured, in order to a trial, that did sit as judges in the late King’s death, and all the officers too attending the Court. Sir John Lenthall<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-467" id="noteref-467" epub:type="noteref">467</a> moving in the House, that all that had borne arms against the King should be exempted from pardon, he was called to the bar of the House, and after a severe reproof he was degraded his knighthood. At Court I find that all things grow high. The old clergy talk as being sure of their lands again, and laugh at the Presbytery; and it is believed that the sales of the King’s and Bishops’ lands will never be confirmed by Parliament, there being nothing now in any man’s power to hinder them and the King from doing what they have a mind, but everybody willing to submit to anything. We expect every day to have the King and Duke on board as soon as it is fair. My Lord do nothing now, but offers all things to the pleasure of the Duke as Lord High Admiral. So that I am at a loss what to do.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-6-1" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-06-01">22nd</time>. Up very early, and now beginning to be settled in my wits again, I went about setting down my last four days’ observations this morning. After that, was trimmed by a barber that has not trimmed me yet, my Spaniard being on shore. News brought that the two Dukes are coming on board, which, by and by, they did, in a Dutch boat, the Duke of York in yellow trimmings, the Duke of Gloucester<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-468" id="noteref-468" epub:type="noteref">468</a> in grey and red. My Lord went in a boat to meet them, the Captain, myself, and others, standing at the entering port. So soon as they were entered we shot the guns off round the fleet. After that they went to view the ship all over, and were most exceedingly pleased with it. They seem to be both very fine gentlemen. After that done, upon the quarterdeck table, under the awning, the Duke of York and my Lord, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-469" id="noteref-469" epub:type="noteref">469</a> and I, spent an hour at allotting to every ship their service, in their return to England; which having done, they went to dinner, where the table was very full: the two Dukes at the upper end, my Lord Opdam next on one side, and my Lord on the other. Two guns given to every man while he was drinking the King’s health, and so likewise to the Duke’s health. I took down Monsieur d’Esquier to the great cabin below, and dined with him in state alone with only one or two friends of his. All dinner the harper belonging to Captain Sparling played to the Dukes. After dinner, the Dukes and my Lord to see the Vice and Rear-Admirals; and I in a boat after them. After that done, they made to the shore in the Dutch boat that brought them, and I got into the boat with them; but the shore was so full of people to expect their coming, as that it was as black (which otherwise is white sand), as everyone could stand by another. When we came near the shore, my Lord left them and came into his own boat, and General Penn<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-470" id="noteref-470" epub:type="noteref">470</a> and I with him; my Lord being very well pleased with this day’s work. By the time we came on board again, news is sent us that the King is on shore; so my Lord fired all his guns round twice, and all the fleet after him, which in the end fell into disorder, which seemed very handsome. The gun over against my cabin I fired myself to the King, which was the first time that he had been saluted by his own ships since this change; but holding my head too much over the gun, I had almost spoiled my right eye. Nothing in the world but going of guns almost all this day. In the evening we began to remove cabins; I to the carpenter’s cabin, and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Clerke with me, who came on board this afternoon, having been twice ducked in the sea today coming from shore, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> North and John Pickering the like. Many of the King’s servants came on board tonight; and so many Dutch of all sorts came to see the ship till it was quite dark, that we could not pass by one another, which was a great trouble to us all. This afternoon <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing (who was knighted yesterday by the King)<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-471" id="noteref-471" epub:type="noteref">471</a> was here on board, and had a ship for his passage into England, with his lady and servants. By the same token he called me to him when I was going to write the order, to tell me that I must write him Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Downing. My Lord lay in the roundhouse tonight. This evening I was late writing a French letter myself by my Lord’s order to Monsieur Kragh,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-472" id="noteref-472" epub:type="noteref">472</a> <i xml:lang="fr">Embassador de Denmarke à la Haye</i>, which my Lord signed in bed. After that I to bed, and the Doctor, and sleep well.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-6-2" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-06-02">23rd</time>. The Doctor and I waked very merry, only my eye was very red and ill in the morning from yesterday’s hurt. In the morning came infinity of people on board from the King to go along with him. My Lord, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew, and others, go on shore to meet the King as he comes off from shore, where Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Stayner bringing His Majesty into the boat, I hear that His Majesty did with a great deal of affection kiss my Lord upon his first meeting. The King, with the two Dukes and Queen of Bohemia, Princess Royal, and Prince of Orange, came on board, where I in their coming in kissed the King’s, Queen’s, and Princess’s hands, having done the other before. Infinite shooting off of the guns, and that in a disorder on purpose, which was better than if it had been otherwise. All day nothing but Lords and persons of honour on board, that we were exceeding full. Dined in a great deal of state, the Royal company by themselves in the coach, which was a blessed sight to see. I dined with <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Clerke, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Quarterman,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-473" id="noteref-473" epub:type="noteref">473</a> and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Darcy<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-474" id="noteref-474" epub:type="noteref">474</a> in my cabin. This morning <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lucy came on board, to whom and his company of the King’s Guard in another ship my Lord did give three dozen of bottles of wine. He made friends between <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierce and me. After dinner the King and Duke altered the name of some of the ships, <abbr>viz.</abbr> the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nazeby</i> into <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Charles</i>;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-475" id="noteref-475" epub:type="noteref">475</a> the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Richard</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">James</i>;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-476" id="noteref-476" epub:type="noteref">476</a> the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Speaker</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Mary</i>;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-477" id="noteref-477" epub:type="noteref">477</a> the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Dunbar</i> (which was not in company with us), the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Henry</i>;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-478" id="noteref-478" epub:type="noteref">478</a> <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Winsly</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Happy Return</i>;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-479" id="noteref-479" epub:type="noteref">479</a> <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Wakefield</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Richmond</i>;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-480" id="noteref-480" epub:type="noteref">480</a> <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Lambert</i>, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Henrietta</i>;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-481" id="noteref-481" epub:type="noteref">481</a> <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Cheriton</i>, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Speedwell</i>;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-482" id="noteref-482" epub:type="noteref">482</a> <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Bradford</i>, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Success</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-483" id="noteref-483" epub:type="noteref">483</a> That done, the Queen, Princess Royal, and Prince of Orange, took leave of the King, and the Duke of York went on board the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">London</i>, and the Duke of Gloucester, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Swiftsure</i>. Which done, we weighed anchor, and with a fresh gale and most happy weather we set sail for England. All the afternoon the King walked here and there, up and down (quite contrary to what I thought him to have been), very active and stirring. Upon the quarterdeck he fell into discourse of his escape from Worcester,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-484" id="noteref-484" epub:type="noteref">484</a> where it made me ready to weep to hear the stories that he told of his difficulties that he had passed through, as his travelling four days and three nights on foot, every step up to his knees in dirt, with nothing but a green coat and a pair of country breeches on, and a pair of country shoes that made him so sore all over his feet, that he could scarce stir. Yet he was forced to run away from a miller and other company, that took them for rogues. His sitting at table at one place, where the master of the house, that had not seen him in eight years, did know him, but kept it private; when at the same table there was one that had been of his own regiment at Worcester, could not know him, but made him drink the King’s health, and said that the King was at least four fingers higher than he. At another place he was by some servants of the house made to drink, that they might know him not to be a Roundhead, which they swore he was. In another place at his inn, the master of the house,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-485" id="noteref-485" epub:type="noteref">485</a> as the King was standing with his hands upon the back of a chair by the fireside, kneeled down and kissed his hand, privately, saying, that he would not ask him who he was, but bid God bless him whither he was going. Then the difficulty of getting a boat to get into France, where he was fain to plot with the master thereof to keep his design from the four men and a boy (which was all his ship’s company), and so got to Fecamp in France.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-486" id="noteref-486" epub:type="noteref">486</a> At Rouen he looked so poorly, that the people went into the rooms before he went away to see whether he had not stole something or other. In the evening I went up to my Lord to write letters for England, which we sent away with word of our coming, by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Edw.</abbr> Pickering. The King supped alone in the coach; after that I got a dish, and we four supped in my cabin, as at noon. About bedtime my Lord Bartlett<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-487" id="noteref-487" epub:type="noteref">487</a> (who I had offered my service to before) sent for me to get him a bed, who with much ado I did get to bed to my Lord Middlesex<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-488" id="noteref-488" epub:type="noteref">488</a> in the great cabin below, but I was cruelly troubled before I could dispose of him, and quit myself of him. So to my cabin again, where the company still was, and were talking more of the King’s difficulties; as how he was fain to eat a piece of bread and cheese out of a poor boy’s pocket; how, at a Catholic house, he was fain to lie in the priest’s hole a good while in the house for his privacy. After that our company broke up, and the Doctor and I to bed. We have all the Lords Commissioners on board us, and many others. Under sail all night, and most glorious weather.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-6-3" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-06-03">24th</time>. Up, and made myself as fine as I could, with the linning stockings on and wide canons<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-489" id="noteref-489" epub:type="noteref">489</a> that I bought the other day at Hague. Extraordinary press of noble company, and great mirth all the day. There dined with me in my cabin (that is, the carpenter’s) <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Earle<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-490" id="noteref-490" epub:type="noteref">490</a> and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hollis,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-491" id="noteref-491" epub:type="noteref">491</a> the King’s Chaplains, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Scarborough,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-492" id="noteref-492" epub:type="noteref">492</a> <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Quarterman, and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Clerke, Physicians, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Darcy, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fox<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-493" id="noteref-493" epub:type="noteref">493</a> (both very fine gentlemen), the King’s servants, where we had brave discourse. Walking upon the decks, where persons of honour all the afternoon, among others, Thomas Killigrew<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-494" id="noteref-494" epub:type="noteref">494</a> (a merry droll, but a gentleman of great esteem with the King), who told us many merry stories: one, how he wrote a letter three or four days ago to the Princess Royal, about a Queen Dowager of Judaea and Palestine, that was at the Hague incognita, that made love to the King, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, which was <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cary (a courtier’s) wife that had been a nun, who are all married to Jesus. At supper the three <abbr>Drs.</abbr> of Physic again at my cabin; where I put <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Scarborough in mind of what I heard him say about the use of the eyes, which he owned, that children do, in every day’s experience, look several ways with both their eyes, till custom teaches them otherwise. And that we do now see but with one eye, our eyes looking in parallel lines. After this discourse I was called to write a pass for my Lord Mandeville to take up horses to London, which I wrote in the King’s name<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-495" id="noteref-495" epub:type="noteref">495</a> and carried it to him to sign, which was the first and only one that ever he signed in the ship <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Charles</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-496" id="noteref-496" epub:type="noteref">496</a> To bed, coming in sight of land a little before night.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-6-4" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-06-04">25th</time>. By the morning we were come close to the land, and everybody made ready to get on shore. The King and the two Dukes did eat their breakfast before they went, and there being set some ship’s diet before them, only to show them the manner of the ship’s diet, they eat of nothing else but peas and pork, and boiled beef. I had <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Darcy in my cabin and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Clerke, who eat with me, told me how the King had given £50 to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply for my Lord’s servants, and £500 among the officers and common men of the ship. I spoke with the Duke of York about business, who called me Pepys by name, and upon my desire did promise me his future favour. Great expectation of the King’s making some Knights, but there was none. About noon (though the brigantine that Beale made was there ready to carry him) yet he would go in my Lord’s barge with the two Dukes. Our Captain steered, and my Lord went along bare with him. I went, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mansell, and one of the King’s footmen, with a dog that the King loved,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-497" id="noteref-497" epub:type="noteref">497</a> (which [dirted] the boat, which made us laugh, and me think that a King and all that belong to him are but just as others are), in a boat by ourselves, and so got on shore when the King did, who was received by General Monk with all imaginable love and respect at his entrance upon the land of Dover. Infinite the crowd of people and the horsemen, citizens, and noblemen of all sorts. The Mayor of the town came and gave him his white staff, the badge of his place, which the King did give him again. The Mayor also presented him from the town a very rich Bible, which he took and said it was the thing that he loved above all things in the world. A canopy was provided for him to stand under, which he did, and talked awhile with General Monk and others, and so into a stately coach there set for him, and so away through the town towards Canterbury, without making any stay at Dover. The shouting and joy expressed by all is past imagination. Seeing that my Lord did not stir out of his barge, I got into a boat, and so into his barge, whither <abbr>Mr.</abbr> John Crew stepped, and spoke a word or two to my Lord, and so returned, we back to the ship, and going did see a man almost drowned that fell out of his boat into the sea, but with much ado was got out. My Lord almost transported with joy that he had done all this without any the least blur or obstruction in the world, that could give an offence to any, and with the great honour he thought it would be to him. Being overtook by the brigantine, my Lord and we went out of our barge into it, and so went on board with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-498" id="noteref-498" epub:type="noteref">498</a> and the Vice and Rear-Admirals. At night my Lord supped and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thomas Crew with Captain Stoakes, I supped with the Captain, who told me what the King had given us. My Lord returned late, and at his coming did give me order to cause the mark to be gilded, and a Crown and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">C. R.</abbr> to be made at the head of the coach table, where the King today with his own hand did mark his height, which accordingly I caused the painter to do, and is now done as is to be seen.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-6-5" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-06-05">26th</time>. Thanks to God I got to bed in my own poor cabin, and slept well till 9 o’clock this morning. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> North and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Clerke and all the great company being gone, I found myself very uncouth all this day for want thereof. My Lord dined with the Vice-Admiral today (who is as officious, poor man! as any spaniel can be; but I believe all to no purpose, for I believe he will not hold his place), so I dined commander at the coach table today, and all the officers of the ship with me, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> White of Dover. After a game or two at ninepins, to work all the afternoon, making above twenty orders. In the evening my Lord having been ashore, the first time that he hath been ashore since he came out of the Hope (having resolved not to go till he had brought his Majesty into England), returned on board with a great deal of pleasure. I supped with the Captain in his cabin with young Captain Cuttance, and afterwards a messenger from the King came with a letter, and to go into France, and by that means we supped again with him at 12 o’clock at night. This night the Captain told me that my Lord had appointed me £30 out of the 1,000 ducats which the King had given to the ship, at which my heart was very much joyed. To bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-6-6" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-06-06">27th (Lord’s day)</time>. Called up by John Goods to see the Garter and Heralds coat, which lay in the coach, brought by Sir Edward Walker,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-499" id="noteref-499" epub:type="noteref">499</a> King at Arms, this morning, for my Lord. My Lord hath summoned all the Commanders on board him, to see the ceremony, which was thus: Sir Edward putting on his coat, and having laid the George and Garter, and the King’s letter to my Lord, upon a crimson cushion (in the coach, all the Commanders standing by), makes three congees to him, holding the cushion in his arms. Then laying it down with the things upon it upon a chair, he takes the letter, and delivers it to my Lord, which my Lord breaks open and gives him to read. It was directed to our trusty and well beloved Sir Edward Montagu, Knight, one of our Generals at sea, and our Companion elect of our Noble Order of the Garter. The contents of the letter is to show that the Kings of England have for many years made use of this honour, as a special mark of favour, to persons of good extraction and virtue (and that many Emperors, Kings and Princes of other countries have borne this honour), and that whereas my Lord is of a noble family, and hath now done the King such service by sea, at this time, as he hath done; he do send him this George and Garter to wear as Knight of the Order, with a dispensation for the other ceremonies of the habit of the Order, and other things, till hereafter, when it can be done. So the herald putting the ribbon about his neck, and the Garter about his left leg, he salutes him with joy as Knight of the Garter, and that was all. After that was done, and the Captain and I had breakfasted with Sir Edward while my Lord was writing of a letter, he took his leave of my Lord, and so to shore again to the King at Canterbury, where he yesterday gave the like honour to General Monk,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-500" id="noteref-500" epub:type="noteref">500</a> who are the only two for many years that have had the Garter given them, before they had other honours of Earldom, or the like, excepting only the Duke of Buckingham, who was only Sir George Villiers when he was made Knight of the Garter.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-501" id="noteref-501" epub:type="noteref">501</a> A while after <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Thos.</abbr> Crew and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Pickering (who had stayed long enough to make all the world see him to be a fool), took ship for London. So there now remain no strangers with my Lord but <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hetley,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-502" id="noteref-502" epub:type="noteref">502</a> who had been with us a day before the King went from us. My Lord and the ship’s company down to sermon. I stayed above to write and look over my new song book, which came last night to me from London in lieu of that that my Lord had of me. The officers being all on board, there was not room for me at table, so I dined in my cabin, where, among other things, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Drum brought me a lobster and a bottle of oil, instead of a bottle of vinegar, whereby I spoiled my dinner. Many orders in the ordering of ships this afternoon. Late to a sermon. After that up to the Lieutenant’s cabin, where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply, I, and the Minister supped, and after that I went down to <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Howe’s cabin, and there, with a great deal of pleasure, singing till it was late. After that to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-6-7" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-06-07">28th</time>. Called up at two in the morning for letters for my Lord from the Duke of York, but I went to bed again till 5. Trimmed early this morning. This morning the Captain did call over all the men in the ship (not the boys), and give every one of them a ducat<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-503" id="noteref-503" epub:type="noteref">503</a> of the King’s money that he gave the ship, and the officers according to their quality. I received in the Captain’s cabin, for my share, sixty ducats. The rest of the morning busy writing letters. So was my Lord that he would not come to dinner. After dinner to write again in order to sending to London, but my Lord did not finish his, so we did not send to London today. A great part of the afternoon at ninepins with my Lord and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hetley. I lost about 4<abbr>s.</abbr> Supped with my Lord, and after that to bed. At night I had a strange dream of ⸻ myself, which I really did, and having kicked my clothes off, I got cold; and found myself all much wet in the morning, and had a great deal of pain⁠ ⁠… which made me very melancholy.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-6-8" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-06-08">29th</time>. The King’s birthday. Busy all the morning writing letters to London, among the rest one to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Chetwind to give me an account of the fees due to the Herald for the Order of the Garter, which my Lord desires to know. After dinner got all ready and sent away <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cook to London with a letter and token to my wife. After that abroad to shore with my Lord (which he offered me of himself, saying that I had a great deal of work to do this month, which was very true). On shore we took horses, my Lord and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Edward, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hetly and I, and three or four servants, and had a great deal of pleasure in riding. Among other things my Lord showed me a house that cost a great deal of money, and is built in so barren and inconvenient a place that my Lord calls it the fool’s house. At last we came upon a very high cliff by the seaside, and rode under it, we having laid great wagers, I and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Mathews, that it was not so high as Paul’s; my Lord and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hetly, that it was. But we riding under it, my Lord made a pretty good measure of it with two sticks, and found it to be not above thirty-five yards high, and Paul’s is reckoned to be about ninety.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-504" id="noteref-504" epub:type="noteref">504</a> From thence toward the barge again, and in our way found the people at Deale going to make a bonfire for joy of the day, it being the King’s birthday, and had some guns which they did fire at my Lord’s coming by. For which I did give twenty shillings among them to drink. While we were on the top of the cliff, we saw and heard our guns in the fleet go off for the same joy. And it being a pretty fair day we could see above twenty miles into France. Being returned on board, my Lord called for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply’s book of Paul’s,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-505" id="noteref-505" epub:type="noteref">505</a> by which we were confirmed in our wager. After that to supper and then to music, and so to bed. The pain that I have got last night by cold is not yet gone, but troubles me at the time of.⁠ ⁠… This day, it is thought, the King do enter the city of London.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-506" id="noteref-506" epub:type="noteref">506</a></p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-6-9" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-06-09">30th</time>. About eight o’clock in the morning the lieutenant came to me to know whether I would eat a dish of mackerel, newly catched, for my breakfast, which the Captain and we did in the coach. All yesterday and today I had a great deal of pain⁠ ⁠… and in my back, which made me afeard. But it proved nothing but cold, which I took yesterday night. All this morning making up my accounts, in which I counted that I had made myself now worth about £80, at which my heart was glad, and blessed God. Many Dover men come and dine with my Lord. My Lord at ninepins in the afternoon. In the afternoon <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply told me how my Lord had put me down for 70 guilders among the money which was given to my Lord’s servants, which my heart did much rejoice at. My Lord supped alone in his chamber. Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Stayner supped with us, and among other things told us how some of his men did grumble that no more of the Duke’s money come to their share and so would not receive any; whereupon he called up those that had taken it, and gives them three shares apiece more, which was very good, and made good sport among the seamen. To bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-6-10" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-06-10">31st</time>. This day my Lord took physic, and came not out of his chamber. All the morning making orders. After dinner a great while below in the great cabin trying with <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Howe some of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Laws’ songs,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-507" id="noteref-507" epub:type="noteref">507</a> particularly that of “<span epub:type="se:name.music.song">What Is a Kiss</span>,” with which we had a great deal of pleasure. After that to making of orders again. Captain Sparling of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Assistance</i> brought me a pair of silk stockings of a light blue, which I was much pleased with. The Captain and I to supper, and after that a most pleasant walk till 10 at night with him upon the deck, it being a fine evening. My pain was gone again that I had yesterday, blessed be God. This day the month ends, I in very good health, and all the world in a merry mood because of the King’s coming. This day I began to teach <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Edward,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-508" id="noteref-508" epub:type="noteref">508</a> who I find to have a very good foundation laid for his Latin by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fuller. I expect every minute to hear how my poor wife do. I find myself in all things well as to body and mind, but troubled for the absence of my wife.</p>
			</article>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
