<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>June 1661</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-18" epub:type="chapter z3998:diary">
			<h2 epub:type="title">June 1661</h2>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-6-1">June 1st</time>. Having taken our leaves of Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten and my Lady, who are gone this morning to keep their Whitsuntide, Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen and I and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gauden by water to Woolwich, and there went from ship to ship to give order for and take notice of their forwardness to go forth, and then to Deptford and did the like, having dined at Woolwich with Captain Poole at the tavern there. From Deptford we walked to Redriffe, calling at the halfway house, and there come into a room where there was infinite of new cakes placed that are made against Whitsuntide, and there we were very merry. By water home, and there did businesses of the office. Among others got my Lord’s imprest of £1,000 and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed’s of £10,000 against this voyage their bills signed. Having wrote letters into the country and read some things I went to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-6-2">2nd (Whitsunday)</time>. The barber having done with me, I went to church, and there heard a good sermon of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mills, fit for the day. Then home to dinner, and then to church again, and going home I found Greatorex (whom I expected today at dinner) come to see me, and so he and I in my chamber drinking of wine and eating of anchovies an hour or two, discoursing of many things in mathematics, and among others he showed me how it comes to pass the strength that levers have, and he showed me that what is got as to matter of strength is lost by them as to matter of time. It rained very hard, as it hath done of late so much that we begin to doubt a famine, and so he was forced to stay longer than I desired. At night after prayers to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-6-3">3rd</time>. To the Wardrobe, where discoursing with my Lord, he did instruct me as to the business of the Wardrobe, in case, in his absence, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Townsend should die, and told me that he do intend to joyne me and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore with him as to the business, now he is going to sea, and spoke to me many other things, as to one that he do put the greatest confidence in, of which I am proud. Here I had a good occasion to tell him (what I have had long in my mind) that, since it has pleased God to bless me with something, I am desirous to lay out something for my father, and so have pitched upon <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Young’s place in the Wardrobe, which I desired he would give order in his absence, if the place should fall that I might have the refusal. Which my Lord did freely promise me, at which I was very glad, he saying that he would do that at the least. So I saw my Lord into the barge going to Whitehall, and I and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed home to my house, whither my father and my cozen Scott came to dine with me, and so we dined together very well, and before we had done in comes my father Bowyer and my mother and four daughters, and a young gentleman and his sister, their friends, and there staid all the afternoon, which cost me great store of wine, and were very merry. By and by I am called to the office, and there staid a little. So home again, and took <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed and left them, and so he and I to the Towre, to speak for some ammunition for ships for my Lord; and so he and I, with much pleasure, walked quite round the Towre, which I never did before. So home, and after a walk with my wife upon the leads, I and she went to bed. This morning I and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Peirce went over to the Beare at the Bridge foot, thinking to have met my Lord Hinchinbroke and his brother setting forth for France; but they being not come we went over to the Wardrobe, and there found that my Lord Abbot Montagu<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-1089" id="noteref-1089" epub:type="noteref">1089</a> being not at Paris, my Lord hath a mind to have them stay a little longer before they go.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-6-4">4th</time>. The Comptroller came this morning to get me to go see a house or two near our office, which he would take for himself or <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turner, and then he would have me have <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turner’s lodgings and himself mine and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Davis’s. But the houses did not like us, and so that design at present is stopped. Then he and I by water to the bridge, and then walked over the Bank-side till we came to the Temple, and so I went over and to my father’s, where I met with my cozen <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Holcroft, and took him and my father and my brother Tom to the Bear tavern and gave them wine, my cozen being to go into the country again tomorrow. From thence to my Lord Crew’s to dinner with him, and had very good discourse about having of young noblemen and gentlemen to think of going to sea, as being as honourable service as the land war. And among other things he told us how, in Queen Elizabeth’s time, one young nobleman would wait with a trencher at the back of another till he came to age himself. And witnessed in my young Lord of Kent, that then was, who waited upon my Lord Bedford at table, when a letter came to my Lord Bedford that the Earldom of Kent was fallen to his servant, the young Lord; and so he rose from table, and made him sit down in his place, and took a lower for himself, for so he was by place to sit.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-1090" id="noteref-1090" epub:type="noteref">1090</a> From thence to the Theatre and saw <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Harry the 4th</i>, a good play. That done I went over the water and walked over the fields to Southwark, and so home and to my lute. At night to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-6-5">5th</time>. This morning did give my wife £4 to lay out upon lace and other things for herself. I to Wardrobe and so to Whitehall and Westminster, where I dined with my Lord and Ned Dickering alone at his lodgings. After dinner to the office, where we sat and did business, and Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen and I went home with Sir <abbr class="name">R.</abbr> Slingsby to bowls in his ally, and there had good sport, and afterwards went in and drank and talked. So home Sir William and I, and it being very hot weather I took my flageolette and played upon the leads in the garden, where Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen came out in his shirt into his leads, and there we staid talking and singing, and drinking great drafts of claret, and eating botargo<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-1091" id="noteref-1091" epub:type="noteref">1091</a> and bread and butter till 12 at night, it being moonshine; and so to bed, very near fuddled.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-6-6">6th</time>. My head hath aked all night, and all this morning, with my last night’s debauch. Called up this morning by Lieutenant Lambert, who is now made Captain of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Norwich</i>, and he and I went down by water to Greenwich, in our way observing and discoursing upon the things of a ship, he telling me all I asked him, which was of good use to me. There we went and eat and drank and heard musique at the Globe, and saw the simple motion that is there of a woman with a rod in her hand keeping time to the musique while it plays, which is simple, methinks. Back again by water, calling at Captain Lambert’s house, which is very handsome and neat, and a fine prospect at top. So to the office, where we sat a little, and then the Captain and I again to Bridewell to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Holland’s, where his wife also, a plain dowdy, and his mother was. Here I paid <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Holland the money due from me to her husband. Here came two young gentlewomen to see <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Holland, and one of them could play pretty well upon the viallin, but, good God! how these ignorant people did cry her up for it! We were very merry. I staid and supped there, and so home and to bed. The weather very hot, this night I left off my wastecoat.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-6-7">7th</time>. To my Lord’s at Whitehall, but not finding him I went to the Wardrobe and there dined with my Lady, and was very kindly treated by her. After dinner to the office, and there till late at night. So home, and to Sir William Batten’s, who is come this day from Chatham with my Lady, who is and has been much troubled with the toothache. Here I staid till late, and so home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-6-8">8th</time>. To Whitehall to my Lord, who did tell me that he would have me go to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Townsend, whom he had ordered to discover to me the whole mystery of the Wardrobe, and none else but me, and that he will make me deputy with him for fear that he should die in my Lord’s absence, of which I was glad. Then to the Cook’s with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shepley and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed, and dined together, and then I went to the Theatre and there saw <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Bartholomew Faire</i>,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-1092" id="noteref-1092" epub:type="noteref">1092</a> the first time it was acted now a-days. It is a most admirable play and well acted, but too much prophane and abusive. From thence, meeting <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed at the door, he and I went to the tobacco shop under Temple Bar gate, and there went up to the top of the house and there sat drinking Lambeth ale a good while. Then away home, and in my way called upon <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rawlinson (my uncle Wight being out of town), for his advice to answer a letter of my uncle Robert, wherein he do offer me a purchase to lay some money upon, that joynes upon some of his own lands, and plainly telling me that the reason of his advice is the convenience that it will give me as to his estate, of which I am exceeding glad, and am advised to give up wholly the disposal of my money to him, let him do what he will with it, which I shall do. So home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-6-9">9th (Lord’s day)</time>. This day my wife put on her black silk gown, which is now laced all over with black gimp lace, as the fashion is, in which she is very pretty. She and I walked to my Lady’s at the Wardrobe, and there dined and was exceeding much made of. After dinner I left my wife there, and I walked to Whitehall, and then went to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierce’s and sat with his wife a good while (who continues very pretty) till he came, and then he and I, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Symons (dancing master), that goes to sea with my Lord, to the Swan tavern, and there drank, and so again to White Hall, and there met with Dean Fuller, and walked a great while with him; among other things discoursed of the liberty the Bishop (by name the of Galloway)<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-1093" id="noteref-1093" epub:type="noteref">1093</a> takes to admit into orders anybody that will; among others, Roundtree, a simple mechanique that was a person formerly in the fleet.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-1094" id="noteref-1094" epub:type="noteref">1094</a> He told me he would complain of it. By and by we went and got a sculler, and landing him at Worcester House, I and <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Howe, who came to us at Whitehall, went to the Wardrobe, where I met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Townsend, who is very willing he says to communicate anything for my Lord’s advantage to me as to his business. I went up to Jane Shore’s towre, and there <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Howe and I sang, and so took my wife and walked home, and so to bed. After I came home a messenger came from my Lord to bid me come to him tomorrow morning.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-6-10">10th</time>. Early to my Lord’s, who privately told me how the King had made him Embassador in the bringing over the Queen.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-1095" id="noteref-1095" epub:type="noteref">1095</a> That he is to go to Algier, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, to settle the business, and to put the fleet in order there; and so to come back to Lisbone with three ships, and there to meet the fleet that is to follow him. He sent for me, to tell me that he do entrust me with the seeing of all things done in his absence as to this great preparation, as I shall receive orders from my Lord Chancellor and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Edward Montagu. At all which my heart is above measure glad; for my Lord’s honour, and some profit to myself, I hope. By and by, out with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shepley, Walden,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-1096" id="noteref-1096" epub:type="noteref">1096</a> Parliament-man for Huntingdon, Rolt, Mackworth, and Alderman Backwell, to a house hard by, to drink Lambeth ale. So I back to the Wardrobe, and there found my Lord going to Trinity House, this being the solemn day of choosing Master, and my Lord is chosen, so he dines there today. I staid and dined with my Lady; but after we were set, comes in some persons of condition, and so the children and I rose and dined by ourselves, all the children and I, and were very merry and they mighty fond of me. Then to the office, and there sat awhile. So home and at night to bed, where we lay in Sir <abbr class="name">R.</abbr> Slingsby’s lodgings in the dining room there in one green bed, my house being now in its last work of painting and whiting.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-6-11">11th</time>. At the office this morning, Sir <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Carteret with us; and we agreed upon a letter to the Duke of York, to tell him the sad condition of this office for want of money; how men are not able to serve us more without some money; and that now the credit of the office is brought so low, that none will sell us anything without our personal security given for the same. All the afternoon abroad about several businesses, and at night home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-6-12">12th</time>. Wednesday, a day kept between a fast and a feast, the Bishops not being ready enough to keep the fast for foul weather before fair weather came; and so they were forced to keep it between both.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-1097" id="noteref-1097" epub:type="noteref">1097</a> I to Whitehall, and there with Captain Rolt<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-1098" id="noteref-1098" epub:type="noteref">1098</a> and Ferrers we went to Lambeth to drink our morning draft, where at the Three Mariners, a place noted for their ale, we went and staid awhile very merry, and so away. And wanting a boat, we found Captain Bun going down the river, and so we went into his boat having a lady with him, and he landed them at Westminster and me at the Bridge. At home all day with my workmen, and doing several things, among others writing the letter resolved of yesterday to the Duke. Then to White Hall, where I met my Lord, who told me he must have £300 laid out in cloth, to give in Barbary, as presents among the Turks. At which occasion of getting something I was very glad. Home to supper, and then to Sir <abbr class="name">R.</abbr> Slingsby, who with his brother and I went to my Lord’s at the Wardrobe, and there staid a great while, but he being now taking his leave of his friends staid out late, and so they went away. Anon came my Lord in, and I staid with him a good while, and then to bed with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore in his chamber.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-6-13">13th</time>. I went up and down to Alderman Backwell’s, but his servants not being up, I went home and put on my gray cloth suit and faced white coat, made of one of my wife’s pettycoates, the first time I have had it on, and so in a riding garb back again and spoke with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shaw<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-1099" id="noteref-1099" epub:type="noteref">1099</a> at the Alderman’s, who offers me £300 if my Lord pleases to buy this cloth with, which pleased me well. So to the Wardrobe and got my Lord to order <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed to imprest so much upon me to be paid by Alderman Backwell. So with my Lord to Whitehall by water, and he having taken leave of the King, comes to us at his lodgings and from thence goes to the garden stairs and there takes barge, and at the stairs was met by Sir <abbr class="name">R.</abbr> Slingsby, who there took his leave of my Lord, and I heard my Lord thank him for his kindness to me, which Sir Robert answered much to my advantage. I went down with my Lord in the barge to Deptford, and there went on board the Dutch yacht and staid there a good while, <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Howe not being come with my Lord’s things, which made my Lord very angry. By and by he comes and so we set sayle, and anon went to dinner, my Lord and we very merry; and after dinner I went down below and there sang, and took leave of <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Howe, Captain Rolt, and the rest of my friends, then went up and took leave of my Lord, who give me his hand and parted with great respect. So went and Captain Ferrers with me into our wherry, and my Lord did give five guns, all they had charged, which was the greatest respect my Lord could do me, and of which I was not a little proud. So with a sad and merry heart I left them sailing pleasantly from Erith, hoping to be in the Downs tomorrow early. We toward London in our boat. Pulled off our stockings and bathed our legs a great while in the river, which I had not done some years before. By and by we come to Greenwich, and thinking to have gone on the King’s yacht, the King was in her, so we passed by, and at Woolwich went on shore, in the company of Captain Poole of Jamaica and young <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Kennersley, and many others, and so to the tavern where we drank a great deal both wine and beer. So we parted hence and went home with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Falconer, who did give us cherrys and good wine. So to boat, and young Poole took us on board the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Charity</i> and gave us wine there, with which I had full enough, and so to our wherry again, and there fell asleep till I came almost to the Tower, and there the Captain and I parted, and I home and with wine enough in my head, went to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-6-14">14th</time>. To Whitehall to my Lord’s, where I found <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Edward Montagu and his family come to lie during my Lord’s absence. I sent to my house by my Lord’s order his shipp<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-1100" id="noteref-1100" epub:type="noteref">1100</a> and triangle virginall. So to my father’s, and did give him order about the buying of this cloth to send to my Lord. But I could not stay with him myself, for having got a great cold by my playing the fool in the water yesterday I was in great pain, and so went home by coach to bed, and went not to the office at all, and by keeping myself warm, I broke wind and so came to some ease. Rose and eat some supper, and so to bed again.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-6-15">15th</time>. My father came and drank his morning draft with me, and sat with me till I was ready, and so he and I about the business of the cloth. By and by I left him and went and dined with my Lady, who, now my Lord is gone, is come to her poor housekeeping again. Then to my father’s, who tells me what he has done, and we resolved upon two pieces of scarlet, two of purple, and two of black, and £50 in linen. I home, taking £300 with me home from Alderman Backwell’s. After writing to my Lord to let him know what I had done I was going to bed, but there coming the purser of the King’s yacht for victualls presently, for the Duke of York is to go down tomorrow, I got him to promise stowage for these things there, and so I went to bed, bidding Will go and fetch the things from the carrier’s hither, which about 12 o’clock were brought to my house and laid there all night.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-6-16">16th (Lord’s day)</time>. But no purser coming in the morning for them, and I hear that the Duke went last night, and so I am at a great loss what to do; and so this day (though the Lord’s day) staid at home, sending Will up and down to know what to do. Sometimes thinking to continue my resolution of sending by the carrier to be at Deal on Wednesday next, sometimes to send them by sea by a vessel on purpose, but am not yet come to a resolution, but am at a very great loss and trouble in mind what in the world to do herein. The afternoon (while Will was abroad) I spent in reading <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Spanish Gypsey</i>,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-1101" id="noteref-1101" epub:type="noteref">1101</a> a play not very good, though commended much. At night resolved to hire a Margate Hoy, who would go away tomorrow morning, which I did, and sent the things all by him, and put them on board about 12 this night, hoping to have them as the wind now serves in the Downs tomorrow night. To-bed with some quiet of mind, having sent the things away.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-6-17">17th</time>. Visited this morning by my old friend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">Ch.</abbr> Carter, who staid and went to Westminster with me, and there we parted, and I to the Wardrobe and dined with my Lady. So home to my painters, who are now about painting my stairs. So to the office, and at night we all went to Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen’s, and there sat and drank till 11 at night, and so home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-6-18">18th</time>. All this morning at home vexing about the delay of my painters, and about four in the afternoon my wife and I by water to Captain Lambert’s, where we took great pleasure in their turret-garden, and seeing the fine needle-works of his wife, the best I ever saw in my life, and afterwards had a very handsome treat and good musique that she made upon the harpsicon, and with a great deal of pleasure staid till 8 at night, and so home again, there being a little pretty witty child that is kept in their house that would not let us go without her, and so fell a-crying by the waterside. So home, where I met Jack Cole, who staid with me a good while, and is still of the old good humour that we were of at school together, and I am very glad to see him. He gone, I went to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-6-19">19th</time>. All the morning almost at home, seeing my stairs finished by the painters, which pleases me well. So with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore to Westminster Hall, it being term, and then by water to the Wardrobe, where very merry, and so home to the office all the afternoon, and at night to the Exchange to my uncle Wight about my intention of purchasing at Brampton. So back again home and at night to bed. Thanks be to God I am very well again of my late pain, and tomorrow hope to be out of my pain of dirt and trouble in my house, of which I am now become very weary. One thing I must observe here while I think of it, that I am now become the most negligent man in the world as to matters of news, insomuch that, nowadays, I neither can tell any, nor ask any of others.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-6-20">20th</time>. At home the greatest part of the day to see my workmen make an end, which this night they did to my great content.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-6-21">21st</time>. This morning going to my father’s I met him, and so he and I went and drank our morning draft at the Samson<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-1102" id="noteref-1102" epub:type="noteref">1102</a> in Paul’s Churchyard, and eat some gammon of bacon, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, and then parted, having bought some green Say<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-1103" id="noteref-1103" epub:type="noteref">1103</a> for curtains in my parler. Home, and so to the Exchequer, where I met with my uncle Wight, and home with him to dinner, where among others (my aunt being out of town), <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Norbury and I did discourse of his wife’s house and land at Brampton, which I find too much for me to buy. Home, and in the afternoon to the office, and much pleased at night to see my house begin to be clean after all the dirt.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-6-22">22nd</time>. Abroad all the morning about several businesses. At noon went and dined with my Lord Crew, where very much made of by him and his lady. Then to the Theatre, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Alchymist</i>,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-1104" id="noteref-1104" epub:type="noteref">1104</a> which is a most incomparable play. And that being done I met with little Luellin and Blirton, who took me to a friend’s of theirs in Lincoln’s Inn fields, one <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hodges, where we drank great store of Rhenish wine and were very merry. So I went home, where I found my house now very clean, which was great content to me.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-6-23">23rd (Lord’s day)</time>. In the morning to church, and my wife not being well, I went with Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten home to dinner, my Lady being out of town, where there was Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen, Captain Allen and his daughter Rebecca, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hempson and his wife. After dinner to church all of us and had a very good sermon of a stranger, and so I and the young company to walk first to Graye’s Inn Walks, where great store of gallants, but above all the ladies that I there saw, or ever did see, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Frances Butler (Monsieur L’Impertinent’s sister) is the greatest beauty. Then we went to Islington, where at the great house I entertained them as well as I could, and so home with them, and so to my own home and to bed. Pall, who went this day to a child’s christening of Kate Joyce’s, staid out all night at my father’s, she not being well.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-6-24">24th (Midsummer-day)</time>. We kept this a holiday, and so went not to the office at all. All the morning at home. At noon my father came to see my house now it is done, which is now very neat. He and I and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Williams (who is come to see my wife, whose soare belly is now grown dangerous as she thinks) to the ordinary over against the Exchange, where we dined and had great wrangling with the master of the house when the reckoning was brought to us, he setting down exceeding high every thing. I home again and to Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten’s, and there sat a good while. So home.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-6-25">25th</time>. Up this morning to put my papers in order that are come from my Lord’s, so that now I have nothing there remaining that is mine, which I have had till now. This morning came <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Goodgroome<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-1105" id="noteref-1105" epub:type="noteref">1105</a> to me (recommended by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mage), with whom I agreed presently to give him 20<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> entrance, which I then did, and 20<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> a month more to teach me to sing, and so we began, and I hope I have come to something in it. His first song is “<i xml:lang="it">La cruda la bella</i>.”<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-1106" id="noteref-1106" epub:type="noteref">1106</a> He gone my brother Tom comes, with whom I made even with my father and the two drapers for the cloths I sent to sea lately. At home all day, in the afternoon came Captain Allen and his daughter Rebecca and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hempson, and by and by both Sir Williams, who sat with me till it was late, and I had a very gallant collation for them. At night to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-6-26">26th</time>. To Westminster about several businesses, then to dine with my Lady at the Wardrobe, taking Dean Fuller along with me; then home, where I heard my father had been to find me about special business; so I took coach and went to him, and found by a letter to him from my aunt that my uncle Robert is taken with a dizziness in his head, so that they desire my father to come down to look after his business, by which we guess that he is very ill, and so my father do think to go tomorrow. And so God’s will be done. Back by water to the office, there till night, and so home to my musique and then to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-6-27">27th</time>. To my father’s, and with him to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Starling’s to drink our morning draft, and there I told him how I would have him speak to my uncle Robert, when he comes thither, concerning my buying of land, that I could pay ready money £600 and the rest by £150 per annum, to make up as much as will buy £50 per annum, which I do, though I not worth above £500 ready money, that he may think me to be a greater saver than I am. Here I took my leave of my father, who is going this morning to my uncle upon my aunt’s letter this week that he is not well and so needs my father’s help. At noon home, and then with my Lady Batten, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Rebecca Allen, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Thompson, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, two coaches of us, we went and saw <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Bartholomew Fayre</i> acted very well, and so home again and staid at Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten’s late, and so home to bed. This day <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Holden sent me a bever, which cost me £4 5<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr><a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-1107" id="noteref-1107" epub:type="noteref">1107</a></p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-6-28">28th</time>. At home all the morning practising to sing, which is now my great trade, and at noon to my Lady and dined with her. So back and to the office, and there sat till 7 at night, and then Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen and I in his coach went to Moorefields, and there walked, and stood and saw the wrestling, which I never saw so much of before, between the north and west countrymen. So home, and this night had our bed set up in our room that we called the Nursery, where we lay, and I am very much pleased with the room.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-6-29">29th</time>. By a letter from the Duke complaining of the delay of the ships that are to be got ready, Sir Williams both and I went to Deptford and there examined into the delays, and were satisfyed. So back again home and staid till the afternoon, and then I walked to the Bell at the Maypole<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-1108" id="noteref-1108" epub:type="noteref">1108</a> in the Strand, and thither came to me by appointment <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Chetwind, Gregory, and Hartlibb, so many of our old club, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Kipps, where we staid and drank and talked with much pleasure till it was late, and so I walked home and to bed. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Chetwind by chewing of tobacco is become very fat and sallow, whereas he was consumptive, and in our discourse he fell commending of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Hooker’s Ecclesiastical Polity</i>,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-1109" id="noteref-1109" epub:type="noteref">1109</a> as the best book, and the only one that made him a Christian, which puts me upon the buying of it, which I will do shortly.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-6-30">30th (Lord’s day)</time>. To church, where we observe the trade of briefs is come now up to so constant a course every Sunday, that we resolve to give no more to them.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-1110" id="noteref-1110" epub:type="noteref">1110</a> A good sermon, and then home to dinner, my wife and I all alone. After dinner Sir Williams both and I by water to Whitehall, where having walked up and down, at last we met with the Duke of York, according to an order sent us yesterday from him, to give him an account where the fault lay in the not sending out of the ships, which we find to be only the wind hath been against them, and so they could not get out of the river. Hence I to Graye’s Inn Walk, all alone, and with great pleasure seeing the fine ladies walk there. Myself humming to myself (which nowadays is my constant practice since I begun to learn to sing) the trillo, and found by use that it do come upon me. Home very weary and to bed, finding my wife not sick, but yet out of order, that I fear she will come to be sick. This day the Portuguese Embassador<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-1111" id="noteref-1111" epub:type="noteref">1111</a> came to White Hall to take leave of the King; he being now going to end all with the Queen, and to send her over. The weather now very fair and pleasant, but very hot. My father gone to Brampton to see my uncle Robert, not knowing whether to find him dead or alive. Myself lately under a great expense of money upon myself in clothes and other things, but I hope to make it up this summer by my having to do in getting things ready to send with the next fleet to the Queen. Myself in good health, but mighty apt to take cold, so that this hot weather I am fain to wear a cloth before my belly.</p>
			</article>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
