<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>April 1660</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-4" epub:type="chapter z3998:diary">
			<h2 epub:type="title">April 1660</h2>
			<article id="entry-1660-04-11" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-04-11">April 1st (Lord’s day)</time>. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ibbott preached very well. After dinner my Lord did give me a private list of all the ships that were to be set out this summer, wherein I do discern that he hath made it his care to put by as much of the Anabaptists as he can. By reason of my Lord and my being busy to send away the packet by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cooke of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nazeby</i>, it was four o’clock before we could begin sermon again. This day Captain Guy come on board from Dunkirk, who tells me that the King will come in, and that the soldiers at Dunkirk do drink the King’s health in the streets. At night the Captain, Sir <abbr class="name">R.</abbr> Stayner, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply, and I did sup together in the Captain’s cabin. I made a commission for Captain Wilgness, of the Bear, tonight, which got me 30<abbr class="currency eoc">s.</abbr> So after writing a while I went to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-04-12" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-04-12">2nd</time>. Up very early, and to get all my things and my boy’s packed up. Great concourse of commanders here this morning to take leave of my Lord upon his going into the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nazeby</i>, so that the table was full, so there dined below many commanders, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed, who was much troubled to hear that he could not go along with my Lord, for he had already got all his things thither, thinking to stay there, but <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Howe was very high against it, and he indeed did put him out, though everybody was glad of it. After dinner I went in one of the boats with my boy before my Lord, and made shift before night to get my cabin in pretty good order. It is but little, but very convenient, having one window to the sea and another to the deck, and a good bed. This morning comes <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">Ed.</abbr> Pickering,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-344" id="noteref-344" epub:type="noteref">344</a> like a coxcomb as he always was. He tells me that the King will come in, but that Monk did resolve to have the doing of it himself, or else to hinder it.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-04-13" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-04-13">3rd</time>. Late to bed. About three in the morning there was great knocking at my cabin, which with much difficulty (so they say) waked me, and I rose, but it was only for a packet, so went to my bed again, and in the morning gave it my Lord. This morning <abbr>Capt.</abbr> Isham comes on board to see my Lord and drunk his wine before he went into the Downs, there likewise come many merchants to get convoy to the Baltique, which a course was taken for. They dined with my Lord, and one of them by name Alderman Wood talked much to my Lord of the hopes that we have now to be settled, (under the King he meant); but my Lord took no notice of it. After dinner which was late my Lord went on shore, and after him I and <abbr>Capt.</abbr> Sparling went in his boat, but the water being almost at low water we could not stay for fear of not getting into our boat again. So back again. This day come the Lieutenant of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Swiftsure</i>, who was sent by my Lord to Hastings, one of the Cinque Ports, to have got <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Edward Montagu<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-345" id="noteref-345" epub:type="noteref">345</a> to have been one of their burgesses, but could not, for they were all promised before. After he had done his message, I took him and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierce, the surgeon (who this day came on board, and not before), to my cabin, where we drank a bottle of wine. At night, busy a-writing, and so to bed. My heart exceeding heavy for not hearing of my dear wife, and indeed I do not remember that ever my heart was so apprehensive of her absence as at this very time.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-04-14" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-04-14">4th</time>. This morning I dispatch many letters of my own private business to London. There come Colonel Thomson with the wooden leg, and General Pen,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-346" id="noteref-346" epub:type="noteref">346</a> and dined with my Lord and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blackburne, who told me that it was certain now that the King must of necessity come in, and that one of the Council told him there is something doing in order to a treaty already among them. And it was strange to hear how <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blackburne did already begin to commend him for a sober man, and how quiet he would be under his government, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> I dined all alone to prevent company, which was exceeding great today, in my cabin. After these two were gone Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Wheeler and Sir John Petters came on board and staid about two or three hours, and so went away. The Commissioners came today, only to consult about a further reducement of the Fleet, and to pay them as fast as they can. I did give Davis, their servant, £5 10<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> to give to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore from me, in part of the £7 that I borrowed of him, and he is to discount the rest out of the 36<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> that he do owe me. At night, my Lord resolved to send the Captain of our ship to Waymouth and promote his being chosen there, which he did put himself into a readiness to do the next morning.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-04-15" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-04-15">5th</time>. Infinity of business all the morning of orders to make, that I was very much perplexed that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Burr had failed me of coming back last night, and we ready to set sail, which we did about noon, and came in the evening to Lee roads and anchored. At night <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply overtook us who had been at Gray’s Market<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-347" id="noteref-347" epub:type="noteref">347</a> this morning. I spent all the afternoon upon the deck, it being very pleasant weather. This afternoon Sir <abbr class="name">Rich.</abbr> Stayner and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed, after we were come to anchor, did come on board, and Creed brought me £30, which my Lord had ordered him to pay me upon account, and Captain Clerke brought me a noted caudle. At night very sleepy to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-04-16" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-04-16">6th</time>. This morning came my brother-in-law Balty<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-348" id="noteref-348" epub:type="noteref">348</a> to see me, and to desire to be here with me as Reformado<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-349" id="noteref-349" epub:type="noteref">349</a> which did much trouble me. But after dinner (my Lord using him very civilly, at table) I spoke to my Lord, and he presented me a letter to Captain Stokes<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-350" id="noteref-350" epub:type="noteref">350</a> for him that he should be there. All the day with him walking and talking, we under sail as far as the Spitts. In the afternoon, <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Howe and I to our viallins, the first time since we came on board. This afternoon I made even with my Lord to this day, and did give him all the money remaining in my hands. In the evening, it being fine moonshine, I staid late walking upon the quarterdeck with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cuttance, learning of some sea terms; and so down to supper and to bed, having an hour before put Balty into Burr’s cabin, he being out of the ship.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-04-17" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-04-17">7th</time>. This day, about nine o’clock in the morning, the wind grew high, and we being among the sands lay at anchor; I began to be dizzy and squeamish. Before dinner my Lord sent for me down to eat some oysters, the best my Lord said that ever he ate in his life, though I have ate as good at Bardsey.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-351" id="noteref-351" epub:type="noteref">351</a> After dinner, and all the afternoon I walked upon the deck to keep myself from being sick, and at last about five o’clock, went to bed and got a caudle made me, and sleep upon it very well. This day <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply went to Sheppy.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-04-18" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-04-18">8th (Lord’s day)</time>. Very calm again, and I pretty well, but my head aked all day. About noon set sail; in our way I see many vessels and masts, which are now the greatest guides for ships. We had a brave wind all the afternoon, and overtook two good merchantmen that overtook us yesterday, going to the East Indies. The lieutenant and I lay out of his window with his glass, looking at the women that were on board them, being pretty handsome. This evening Major Willoughby, who had been here three or four days on board with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pickering,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-352" id="noteref-352" epub:type="noteref">352</a> went on board a catch<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-353" id="noteref-353" epub:type="noteref">353</a> for Dunkirk. We continued sailing when I went to bed, being somewhat ill again, and Will Howe, the surgeon, parson, and Balty supped in the Lieutenant’s cabin and afterwards sat disputing, the parson for and I against extemporary prayers, very hot.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-04-19" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-04-19">9th</time>. We having sailed all night, were come in sight of the Nore and South Forelands in the morning, and so sailed all day. In the afternoon we had a very fresh gale, which I brooked better than I thought I should be able to do. This afternoon I first saw France and Calais, with which I was much pleased, though it was at a distance. About five o’clock we came to the Goodwin, so to the Castles about Deal,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-354" id="noteref-354" epub:type="noteref">354</a> where our Fleet lay, among whom we anchored. Great was the shout of guns from the castles and ships, and our answers, that I never heard yet so great rattling of guns. Nor could we see one another on board for the smoke that was among us, nor one ship from another. Soon as we came to anchor, the captains came from on board their ships all to us on board. This afternoon I wrote letters for my Lord to the Council, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dickering was to carry, who took his leave this night of my Lord, and Balty after I had wrote two or three letters by him to my wife and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bowyer, and had drank a bottle of wine with him in my cabin which <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Goods and <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Howe brought on purpose, he took leave of me too to go away tomorrow morning with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dickering. I lent Balty 15<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> which he was to pay to my wife. It was one in the morning before we parted. This evening <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply came on board, having escaped a very great danger upon a sand coming from Chatham.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-04-20" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-04-20">10th</time>. This morning many or most of the commanders in the Fleet came on board and dined here, so that some of them and I dined together in the Roundhouse, where we were very merry. Hither came the Vice-Admiral to us, and sat and talked and seemed a very good-natured man. At night as I was all alone in my cabin, in a melancholy fit playing on my viallin, my Lord and Sir <abbr class="name">R.</abbr> Stayner came into the coach<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-355" id="noteref-355" epub:type="noteref">355</a> and supped there, and called me out to supper with them. After that up to the Lieutenant’s cabin, where he and I and Sir Richard sat till 11 o’clock talking, and so to bed. This day my Lord Goring<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-356" id="noteref-356" epub:type="noteref">356</a> returned from France, and landed at Dover.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-04-21" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-04-21">11th</time>. A Gentleman came this morning from my Lord of Manchester to my Lord for a pass for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Boyle,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-357" id="noteref-357" epub:type="noteref">357</a> which was made him. I ate a good breakfast by my Lord’s orders with him in the great cabin below. The wind all this day was very high, so that a gentleman that was at dinner with my Lord that came along with Sir John Bloys<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-358" id="noteref-358" epub:type="noteref">358</a> (who seemed a fine man) was forced to rise from table. This afternoon came a great packet of letters from London directed to me, among the rest two from my wife, the first that I have since coming away from London. All the news from London is that things go on further towards a King. That the Skinners’ Company the other day at their entertaining of General Monk<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-359" id="noteref-359" epub:type="noteref">359</a> had took down the Parliament Arms in their Hall, and set up the King’s. In the evening my Lord and I had a great deal of discourse about the several Captains of the Fleet and his interest among them, and had his mind clear to bring in the King. He confessed to me that he was not sure of his own Captain [Cuttance] to be true to him, and that he did not like Captain Stokes. At night <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Howe and I at our viallins in my cabin, where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ibbott and the lieutenant were late. I staid the lieutenant late, showing him my manner of keeping a journal. After that to bed. It comes now into my mind to observe that I am sensible that I have been a little too free to make mirth with the minister of our ship, he being a very sober and an upright man.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-04-22" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-04-22">12th</time>. This day, the weather being very bad, we had no strangers on board. In the afternoon came the Vice-Admiral on board, with whom my Lord consulted, and I sent a packet to London at night with several letters to my friends, as to my wife about my getting of money for her when she should need it, to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bowyer that he tell me when the Messieurs of the offices be paid, to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore about the business of my office, and making even with him as to matter of money. At night after I had despatched my letters, to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-04-23" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-04-23">13th</time>. This day very foul all day for rain and wind. In the afternoon set my own things in my cabin and chests in better order than hitherto, and set my papers in order. At night sent another packet to London by the post, and after that was done I went up to the lieutenant’s cabin and there we broached a vessel of ale that we had sent for among us from Deal today. There was the minister and doctor with us. After that till one o’clock in the morning writing letters to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing about my business of continuing my office to myself, only <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore to execute it for me. I had also a very serious and effectual letter from my Lord to him to that purpose. After that done then to bed, and it being very rainy, and the rain coming upon my bed, I went and lay with John Goods in the great cabin below, the wind being so high that we were faro to lower some of the masts. I to bed, and what with the goodness of the bed and the rocking of the ship I slept till almost ten o’clock, and then⁠—</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-04-24" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-04-24">14th</time>. Rose and drank a good morning draught there with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply, which occasioned my thinking upon the happy life that I live now, had I nothing to care for but myself. The sea was this morning very high, and looking out of the window I saw our boat come with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierce, the surgeon, in it in great danger, who endeavouring to come on board us, had like to have been drowned had it not been for a rope. This day I was informed that my Lord Lambert is got out of the Tower<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-360" id="noteref-360" epub:type="noteref">360</a> and that there is £100 proffered to whoever shall bring him forth to the Council of State. My Lord is chosen at Waymouth this morning; my Lord had his freedom brought him by Captain Tiddiman<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-361" id="noteref-361" epub:type="noteref">361</a> of the port of Dover, by which he is capable of being elected for them. This day I heard that the Army had in general declared to stand by what the next Parliament shall do. At night supped with my Lord.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-04-25" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-04-25">15th (Lord’s day)</time>. Up early and was trimmed by the barber in the great cabin below. After that to put my clothes on and then to sermon, and then to dinner, where my Lord told us that the University of Cambridge had a mind to choose him for their burgess, which he pleased himself with, to think that they do look upon him as a thriving man, and said so openly at table. At dinnertime <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cook came back from London with a packet which caused my Lord to be full of thoughts all day, and at night he bid me privately to get two commissions ready, one for <abbr>Capt.</abbr> Robert Blake to be captain of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Worcester</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-362" id="noteref-362" epub:type="noteref">362</a> in the room of <abbr>Capt.</abbr> Dekings, an anabaptist, and one that had witnessed a great deal of discontent with the present proceedings. The other for <abbr>Capt.</abbr> Coppin<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-363" id="noteref-363" epub:type="noteref">363</a> to come out of that into the Newbury in the room of Blake, whereby I perceive that General Monk do resolve to make a thorough change, to make way for the King. From London I hear that since Lambert got out of the Tower, the Fanatiques had held up their heads high, but I hope all that will come to nothing. Late a writing of letters to London to get ready for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cook. Then to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-04-26" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-04-26">16th</time>. And about 4 o’clock in the morning <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cook waked me where I lay in the great cabin below, and I did give him his packet and directions for London. So to sleep again. All the morning giving out orders and tickets to the Commanders of the Fleet to discharge all supernumeraries that they had above the number that the Council had set in their last establishment. After dinner busy all the afternoon writing, and so till night, then to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-04-27" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-04-27">17th</time>. All the morning getting ready commissions for the Vice-Admiral<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-364" id="noteref-364" epub:type="noteref">364</a> and the Rear-Admiral,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-365" id="noteref-365" epub:type="noteref">365</a> wherein my Lord was very careful to express the utmost of his own power, commanding them to obey what orders they should receive from the Parliament, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, or both or either of the Generals.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-366" id="noteref-366" epub:type="noteref">366</a> The Vice-Admiral dined with us, and in the afternoon my Lord called me to give him the commission for him, which I did, and he gave it him himself. A very pleasant afternoon, and I upon the deck all the day, it was so clear that my Lord’s glass showed us Calais very plain, and the cliffs were as plain to be seen as Kent, and my Lord at first made me believe that it was Kent. At night, after supper, my Lord called for the Rear-Admiral’s commission, which I brought him, and I sitting in my study heard my Lord discourse with him concerning <abbr class="name">D.</abbr> King’s and Newberry’s being put out of commission. And by the way I did observe that my Lord did speak more openly his mind to me afterwards at night than I can find that he did to the Rear-Admiral, though his great confidant. For I was with him an hour together, when he told me clearly his thoughts that the King would carry it, and that he did think himself very happy that he was now at sea, as well for his own sake, as that he thought he might do his country some service in keeping things quiet. To bed, and shifting myself from top to toe, there being <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Goods and <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Howe sat late by my bedside talking. So to sleep, every day bringing me a fresh sense of the pleasure of my present life.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-04-28" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-04-28">18th</time>. This morning very early came <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Edward Montagu on board, but what was the business of his coming again or before without any servant and making no stay at all I cannot guess. This day Sir <abbr class="name">R.</abbr> Stayner, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply, and as many of my Lord’s people as could be spared went to Dover to get things ready against tomorrow for the election there. I all the afternoon dictating in my cabin (my own head being troubled with multiplicity of business) to Burr, who wrote for me above a dozen letters, by which I have made my mind more light and clear than I have had it yet since I came on board. At night sent a packet to London, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cook returned hence bringing me this news, that the Sectaries do talk high what they will do, but I believe all to no purpose, but the Cavaliers are something unwise to talk so high on the other side as they do. That the Lords do meet every day at my Lord of Manchester’s, and resolve to sit the first day of the Parliament. That it is evident now that the General and the Council do resolve to make way for the King’s coming. And it is now clear that either the Fanatiques must now be undone, or the gentry and citizens throughout England, and clergy must fall, in spite of their militia and army, which is not at all possible I think. At night I supped with <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Howe and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Luellin (being the first time that I had been so long with him) in the great cabin below. After that to bed, and <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Howe sat by my bedside, and he and I sang a psalm or two and so I to sleep.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-04-29" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-04-29">19th</time>. A great deal of business all this day, and Burr being gone to shore without my leave did vex me much. At dinner news was brought us that my Lord was chosen at Dover. This afternoon came one <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mansell on board as a Reformado, to whom my Lord did show exceeding great respect, but upon what account I do not yet know. This day it has rained much, so that when I came to go to bed I found it wet through, so I was fain to wrap myself up in a dry sheet, and so lay all night.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-04-30" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-04-30">20th</time>. All the morning I was busy to get my window altered, and to have my table set as I would have it, which after it was done I was infinitely pleased with it, and also to see what a command I have to have everyone ready to come and go at my command. This evening came <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Boyle on board, for whom I writ an order for a ship to transport him to Flushing. He supped with my Lord, my Lord using him as a person of honour. This evening too came <abbr>Mr.</abbr> John Pickering on board us. This evening my head ached exceedingly, which I impute to my sitting backwards in my cabin, otherwise than I am used to do. Tonight <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply told me that he heard for certain at Dover that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">Edw.</abbr> Montagu did go beyond sea when he was here first the other day, and I am apt to believe that he went to speak with the King. This day one told me how that at the election at Cambridge for knights of the shire, Wendby<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-367" id="noteref-367" epub:type="noteref">367</a> and Thornton<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-368" id="noteref-368" epub:type="noteref">368</a> by declaring to stand for the Parliament and a King and the settlement of the Church, did carry it against all expectation against Sir Dudley North and Sir Thomas Willis.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-369" id="noteref-369" epub:type="noteref">369</a> I supped tonight with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply below at the half-deck table, and after that I saw <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pickering whom my Lord brought down to his cabin, and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-05-01" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-05-01">21st</time>. This day dined Sir John Boys<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-370" id="noteref-370" epub:type="noteref">370</a> and some other gentlemen formerly great Cavaliers, and among the rest one <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Norwood,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-371" id="noteref-371" epub:type="noteref">371</a> for whom my Lord give a convoy to carry him to the Brill<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-372" id="noteref-372" epub:type="noteref">372</a> but he is certainly going to the King. For my Lord commanded me that I should not enter his name in my book. My Lord do show them and that sort of people great civility. All their discourse and others are of the King’s coming, and we begin to speak of it very freely. And heard how in many churches in London, and upon many signs there, and upon merchants’ ships in the river, they had set up the King’s arms. In the afternoon the Captain would by all means have me up to his cabin, and there treated me huge nobly, giving me a barrel of pickled oysters, and opened another for me, and a bottle of wine, which was a very great favour. At night late singing with <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Howe, and under the barber’s hands in the coach. This night there came one with a letter from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">Edw.</abbr> Montagu to my Lord, with command to deliver it to his own hands. I do believe that he do carry some close business on for the King.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-373" id="noteref-373" epub:type="noteref">373</a> This day I had a large letter from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore, giving me an account of the present dispute at London that is like to be at the beginning of the Parliament, about the House of Lords, who do resolve to sit with the Commons, as not thinking themselves dissolved yet. Which, whether it be granted or no, or whether they will sit or no, it will bring a great many inconveniences. His letter I keep, it being a very well writ one.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-05-02" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-05-02">22nd</time>.(Easter Sunday). Several Londoners, strangers, friends of the Captains, dined here, who, among other things told us, how the King’s Arms are every day set up in houses and churches, particularly in Allhallows Church in Thames-street,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-374" id="noteref-374" epub:type="noteref">374</a> John Simpson’s church, which being privately done was, a great eyesore to his people when they came to church and saw it. Also they told us for certain, that the King’s statue is making by the Mercers’ Company (who are bound to do it)<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-375" id="noteref-375" epub:type="noteref">375</a> to set up in the Exchange. After sermon in the afternoon I fell to writing letters against tomorrow to send to London. After supper to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-05-03" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-05-03">23rd</time>. All the morning very busy getting my packet ready for London, only for an hour or two had the Captain and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply in my cabin at the barrel of pickled oysters that the Captain did give me on Saturday last. After dinner I sent <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dunn to London with the packet. This afternoon I had 40<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> given me by Captain Cowes of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Paradox</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-376" id="noteref-376" epub:type="noteref">376</a> In the evening the first time that we had any sport among the seamen, and indeed there was extraordinary good sport after my Lord had done playing at ninepins. After that <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Howe and I went to play two trebles in the great cabin below, which my Lord hearing, after supper he called for our instruments, and played a set of Lock’s, two trebles, and a base, and that being done, he fell to singing of a song made upon the Rump, with which he played himself well, to the tune of “The Blacksmith.” After all that done, then to bed.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-377" id="noteref-377" epub:type="noteref">377</a></p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-05-04" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-05-04">24th</time>. This morning I had <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Luellin and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply to the remainder of my oysters that were left yesterday. After that very busy all the morning. While I was at dinner with my Lord, the Coxon of the Vice-Admiral came for me to the Vice-Admiral to dinner. So I told my Lord and he gave me leave to go. I rose therefore from table and went, where there was very many commanders, and very pleasant we were on board the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">London</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-378" id="noteref-378" epub:type="noteref">378</a> which hath a stateroom much bigger than the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nazeby</i>, but not so rich. After that, with the Captain on board our own ship, where we were saluted with the news of Lambert’s being taken, which news was brought to London on Sunday last. He was taken in Northamptonshire by Colonel Ingoldsby,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-379" id="noteref-379" epub:type="noteref">379</a> at the head of a party, by which means their whole design is broke, and things now very open and safe. And every man begins to be merry and full of hopes. In the afternoon my Lord gave a great large character to write out, so I spent all the day about it, and after supper my Lord and we had some more very good musique and singing of “Turne Amaryllis,” as it is printed in the song book, with which my Lord was very much pleased. After that to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-05-05" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-05-05">25th</time>. All the morning about my Lord’s character. Dined today with Captain Clerke on board the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Speaker</i> (a very brave ship) where was the Vice-Admiral, Rear-Admiral, and many other commanders. After dinner home, not a little contented to see how I am treated, and with what respect made a fellow to the best commanders in the Fleet. All the afternoon finishing of the character, which I did and gave it my Lord, it being very handsomely done and a very good one in itself, but that not truly Alphabetical. Supped with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply, <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Howe, <abbr>etc.</abbr> in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierce, the Purser’s cabin, where very merry, and so to bed. Captain Isham came hither today.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-05-06" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-05-06">26th</time>. This day came <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Donne back from London, who brought letters with him that signify the meeting of the Parliament yesterday. And in the afternoon by other letters I hear, that about twelve of the Lords met and had chosen my Lord of Manchester<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-380" id="noteref-380" epub:type="noteref">380</a> Speaker of the House of Lords (the young Lords that never sat yet, do forbear to sit for the present); and Sir Harbottle Grimstone,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-381" id="noteref-381" epub:type="noteref">381</a> Speaker for the House of Commons. The House of Lords sent to have a conference with the House of Commons, which, after a little debate, was granted. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Reynolds<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-382" id="noteref-382" epub:type="noteref">382</a> preached before the Commons before they sat. My Lord told me how Sir <abbr class="name">H.</abbr> Yelverton<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-383" id="noteref-383" epub:type="noteref">383</a> (formerly my schoolfellow) was chosen in the first place for Northamptonshire and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew in the second. And told me how he did believe that the Cavaliers have now the upper hand clear of the Presbyterians. All the afternoon I was writing of letters, among the rest one to <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Simons, Peter Luellin and Tom Doling, which because it is somewhat merry I keep a copy of. After that done <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply, <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Howe and I down with <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Goods into my Lord’s storeroom of wine and other drink, where it was very pleasant to observe the massy timbers that the ship is made of. We in the room were wholly under water and yet a deck below that. After that to supper, where Tom Guy supped with us, and we had very good laughing, and after that some musique, where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pickering beginning to play a bass part upon the viall did it so like a fool that I was ashamed of him. After that to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-05-07" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-05-07">27th</time>. This morning Burr was absent again from on board, which I was troubled at, and spoke to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierce, Purser, to speak to him of it, and it is my mind. This morning Pim [the tailor] spent in my cabin, putting a great many ribbons to a suit. After dinner in the afternoon came on board Sir Thomas Hatton<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-384" id="noteref-384" epub:type="noteref">384</a> and Sir <abbr class="name">R.</abbr> Maleverer<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-385" id="noteref-385" epub:type="noteref">385</a> going for Flushing; but all the world know that they go where the rest of the many gentlemen go that every day flock to the King at Breda.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-386" id="noteref-386" epub:type="noteref">386</a> They supped here, and my Lord treated them as he do the rest that go thither, with a great deal of civility. While we were at supper a packet came, wherein much news from several friends. The chief is that, that I had from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore, <abbr>viz.</abbr> that he fears the Cavaliers in the House will be so high, that the others will be forced to leave the House and fall in with General Monk, and so offer things to the King so high on the Presbyterian account that he may refuse, and so they will endeavour some more mischief; but when I told my Lord it, he shook his head and told me, that the Presbyterians are deceived, for the General is certainly for the King’s interest, and so they will not be able to prevail that way with him. After supper the two knights went on board the Grantham, that is to convey them to Flushing. I am informed that the Exchequer is now so low, that there is not £20 there, to give the messenger that brought the news of Lambert’s being taken; which story is very strange that he should lose his reputation of being a man of courage now at one blow, for that he was not able to fight one stroke, but desired of Colonel Ingoldsby several times for God’s sake to let him escape. Late reading my letters, my mind being much troubled to think that, after all our hopes, we should have any cause to fear any more disappointments therein. To bed. This day I made even with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed, by sending him my bill and he me my money by Burr whom I sent for it.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-05-08" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-05-08">28th</time>. This morning sending a packet by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dunne to London. In the afternoon I played at ninepins with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pickering, I and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pett<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-387" id="noteref-387" epub:type="noteref">387</a> against him and Ted Osgood, and won a crown apiece of him. He had not money enough to pay me. After supper my Lord exceeding merry, and he and I and <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Howe to sing, and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-05-09" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-05-09">29th (Sunday)</time>. This day I put on first my fine cloth suit made of a cloak that had like to have been [dirted] a year ago, the very day that I put it on. After sermon in the morning <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cook came from London with a packet, bringing news how all the young lords that were not in arms against the Parliament do now sit. That a letter is come from the King to the House, which is locked up by the Council ’till next Tuesday that it may be read in the open House when they meet again, they having adjourned till then to keep a fast tomorrow. And so the contents is not yet known. £13,000 of the £20,000 given to General Monk is paid out of the Exchequer, he giving £12 among the teller clerks of Exchequer. My Lord called me into the great cabin below, where I opened my letters and he told me that the Presbyterians are quite mastered by the Cavaliers, and that he fears <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew did go a little too far the other day in keeping out the young lords from sitting. That he do expect that the King should be brought over suddenly, without staying to make any terms at all, saying that the Presbyterians did intend to have brought him in with such conditions as if he had been in chains. But he shook his shoulders when he told me how Monk had betrayed him, for it was he that did put them upon standing to put out the lords and other members that came not within the qualifications, which he [Montagu] did not like, but however he [Monk] had done his business, though it be with some kind of baseness. After dinner I walked a great while upon the deck with the chyrurgeon and purser, and other officers of the ship, and they all pray for the King’s coming, which I pray God send.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-05-10" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-05-10">30th</time>. All the morning getting instructions ready for the Squadron of ships that are going today to the Streights, among others Captain Teddiman, Curtis, and Captain Robert Blake to be commander of the whole Squadron. After dinner to ninepins, <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Howe and I against <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed and the Captain. We lost 5<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> apiece to them. After that <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Howe, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply and I got my Lord’s leave to go to see Captain Sparling.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-388" id="noteref-388" epub:type="noteref">388</a> So we took boat and first went on shore, it being very pleasant in the fields; but a very pitiful town Deal is. We went to Fuller’s (the famous place for ale), but they have none but what was in the vat. After that to Poole’s, a tavern in the town, where we drank, and so to boat again, and went to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Assistance</i>, where we were treated very civilly by the Captain, and he did give us such music upon the harp by a fellow that he keeps on board that I never expect to hear the like again, yet he is a drunken simple fellow to look on as any I ever saw. After that on board the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nazeby</i>, where we found my Lord at supper, so I sat down and very pleasant my Lord was with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed and Sheply, who he puzzled about finding out the meaning of the three notes which my Lord had cut over the chrystal of his watch. After supper some musique. Then <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply, <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Howe and I up to the Lieutenant’s cabin, where we drank, and I and <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Howe were very merry, and among other frolics he pulls out the spigot of the little vessel of ale that was there in the cabin and drew some into his mounteere, and after he had drank, I endeavouring to dash it in his face, he got my velvet studying cap and drew some into mine too, that we made ourselves a great deal of mirth, but spoiled my clothes with the ale that we dashed up and down. After that to bed very late with drink enough in my head.</p>
			</article>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
