<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>January 1665–66</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-73" epub:type="chapter z3998:diary">
			<h2 epub:type="title">January 1665⁠–⁠66</h2>
			<article id="entry-1666-1-11" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1666-01-11">January 1st (New-Yeare’s Day)</time>. Called up by five o’clock, by my order, by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Tooker, who wrote, while I dictated to him, my business of the Pursers; and so, without eating or drinking, till three in the afternoon, and then, to my great content, finished it. So to dinner, Gibson and he and I, and then to copying it over, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gibson reading and I writing, and went a good way in it till interrupted by Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Warren’s coming, of whom I always learne something or other, his discourse being very good and his brains also. He being gone we to our business again, and wrote more of it fair, and then late to bed.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2758" id="noteref-2758" epub:type="noteref">2758</a></p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1666-1-12" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1666-01-12">2nd</time>. Up by candlelight again, and wrote the greatest part of my business fair, and then to the office, and so home to dinner, and after dinner up and made an end of my fair writing it, and that being done, set two entering while to my Lord Brouncker’s, and there find Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes and all his company, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Boreman and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Turner, but, above all, my dear <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Knipp, with whom I sang, and in perfect pleasure I was to hear her sing, and especially her little Scotch song of “Barbary Allen;”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2759" id="noteref-2759" epub:type="noteref">2759</a> and to make our mirthe the completer, Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes was in the highest pitch of mirthe, and his mimical tricks, that ever I saw, and most excellent pleasant company he is, and the best mimic that ever I saw, and certainly would have made an excellent actor, and now would be an excellent teacher of actors. Thence, it being post night, against my will took leave, but before I come to my office, longing for more of her company, I returned and met them coming home in coaches, so I got into the coach where <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Knipp was and got her upon my knee (the coach being full) and played with her breasts and sung, and at last set her at her house and so good night. So home to my lodgings and there endeavoured to have finished the examining my papers of Pursers’ business to have sent away tonight, but I was so sleepy with my late early risings and late goings to bed that I could not do it, but was forced to go to bed and leave it to send away tomorrow by an Express.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1666-1-13" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1666-01-13">3rd</time>. Up, and all the morning till three in the afternoon examining and fitting up my Pursers’ paper and sent it away by an Express. Then comes my wife, and I set her to get supper ready against I go to the Duke of Albemarle and back again; and at the Duke’s with great joy I received the good news of the decrease of the plague this week to 70, and but 253 in all; which is the least Bill hath been known these twenty years in the City. Through the want of people in London is it, that must make it so low below the ordinary number for Bills. So home, and find all my good company I had bespoke, as Coleman and his wife, and Laneare, Knipp and her surly husband; and good music we had, and, among other things, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Coleman sang my words I set of “Beauty retire,” and I think it is a good song, and they praise it mightily. Then to dancing and supper, and mighty merry till <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rolt come in, whose pain of the tooth-ache made him no company, and spoilt ours; so he away, and then my wife’s teeth fell of aching, and she to bed. So forced to break up all with a good song, and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1666-1-14" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1666-01-14">4th</time>. Up, and to the office, where my Lord Brouncker and I, against Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten and Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes and the whole table, for Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Warren in the business of his mast contract, and overcome them and got them to do what I had a mind to, for indeed my Lord being unconcerned in what I aimed at. So home to dinner, where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheldon come by invitation from Woolwich, and as merry as I could be with all my thoughts about me and my wife still in pain of her tooth. He anon took leave and took <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Barbary his niece home with him, and seems very thankful to me for the £10 I did give him for my wife’s rent of his house, and I am sure I am beholding to him, for it was a great convenience to me, and then my wife home to London by water and I to the office till 8 at night, and so to my Lord Brouncker’s, thinking to have been merry, having appointed a meeting for Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes and his company and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Knipp again, but whatever hindered I know not, but no company come, which vexed me because it disappointed me of the glut of mirthe I hoped for. However, good discourse with my Lord and merry, with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams’s descants upon Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes’s and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Turner’s not coming. So home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1666-1-15" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1666-01-15">5th</time>. I with my Lord Brouncker and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams by coach with four horses to London, to my Lord’s house in Covent-Guarden. But, Lord! what staring to see a nobleman’s coach come to town. And porters everywhere bow to us; and such begging of beggars! And a delightful thing it is to see the town full of people again as now it is; and shops begin to open, though in many places seven or eight together, and more, all shut; but yet the town is full, compared with what it used to be. I mean the City end; for Covent-Guarden and Westminster are yet very empty of people, no Court nor gentry being there. Set <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams down at my Lord’s house and he and I to Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Carteret, at his chamber at Whitehall, he being come to town last night to stay one day. So my Lord and he and I much talk about the Act, what credit we find upon it, but no private talk between him and I. So I to the ’Change, and there met <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Povy, newly come to town, and he and I to Sir George Smith’s and there dined nobly. He tells me how my Lord Bellases complains for want of money and of him and me therein, but I value it not, for I know I do all that can be done. We had no time to talk of particulars, but leave it to another day, and I away to Cornhill to expect my Lord Brouncker’s coming back again, and I stayed at my stationer’s house, and by and by comes my Lord, and did take me up and so to Greenwich, and after sitting with them a while at their house, home, thinking to get <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Knipp, but could not, she being busy with company, but sent me a pleasant letter, writing herself “Barbary Allen.” I went therefore to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Boreman’s for pastime, and there stayed an houre or two talking with him, and reading a discourse about the River of Thames, the reason of its being choked up in several places with shelfes; which is plain is, by the encroachments made upon the River, and running out of causeways into the River at every wood-wharf; which was not heretofore when Westminster Hall and Whitehall were built, and Redriffe Church, which now are sometimes overflown with water. I had great satisfaction herein. So home and to my papers for lacke of company, but by and by comes little <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Tooker and sat and supped with me, and I kept her very late talking and making her comb my head, and did what I will with her. So late to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1666-1-16" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1666-01-16">6th</time>. Up betimes and by water to the Cockpit, there met Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Carteret and, after discourse with the Duke, all together, and there saw a letter wherein Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Coventry did take notice to the Duke with a commendation of my paper about Pursers, I to walke in the Park with the Vice-Chamberlain, and received his advice about my deportment about the advancing the credit of the Act; giving me caution to see that we do not misguide the King by making them believe greater matters from it than will be found. But I see that this arises from his great trouble to see the Act succeede, and to hear my name so much used and my letters shown at Court about goods served us in upon the credit of it. But I do make him believe that I do it with all respect to him and on his behalfe too, as indeed I do, as well as my own, that it may not be said that he or I do not assist therein. He tells me that my Lord Sandwich do proceed on his journey with the greatest kindness that can be imagined from the King and Chancellor, which was joyful news to me. Thence with Lord Brouncker to Greenwich by water to a great dinner and much company; <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cottle and his lady and others and I went, hoping to get <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Knipp to us, having wrote a letter to her in the morning, calling myself “Dapper Dicky,”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2760" id="noteref-2760" epub:type="noteref">2760</a> in answer to hers of “Barbary Allen,” but could not, and am told by the boy that carried my letter, that he found her crying; but I fear she lives a sad life with that ill-natured fellow her husband: so we had a great, but I a melancholy dinner, having not her there, as I hoped. After dinner to cards, and then comes notice that my wife is come unexpectedly to me to town. So I to her. It is only to see what I do, and why I come not home; and she is in the right that I would have a little more of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Knipp’s company before I go away. My wife to fetch away my things from Woolwich, and I back to cards and after cards to choose King and Queen, and a good cake there was, but no marks found; but I privately found the clove, the mark of the knave, and privately put it into Captain Cocke’s piece, which made some mirthe, because of his lately being known by his buying of clove and mace of the East India prizes. At night home to my lodging, where I find my wife returned with my things, and there also Captain Ferrers is come upon business of my Lord’s to this town about getting some goods of his put on board in order to his going to Spain, and Ferrers presumes upon my finding a bed for him, which I did not like to have done without my invitation because I had done [it] several times before, during the plague, that he could not provide himself safely elsewhere. But it being Twelfth Night, they had got the fiddler and mighty merry they were; and I above come not to them, but when I had done my business among my papers went to bed, leaving them dancing, and choosing King and Queen.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1666-1-17" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1666-01-17">7th (Lord’s day)</time>. Up, and being trimmed I was invited by Captain Cocke, so I left my wife, having a mind to some discourse with him, and dined with him. He tells me of new difficulties about his goods which troubles me and I fear they will be great. He tells me too what I hear everywhere how the town talks of my Lord Craven being to come into Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Carteret’s place; but sure it cannot be true. But I do fear those two families, his and my Lord Sandwich’s, are quite broken. And I must now stand upon my own legs. Thence to my lodging, and considering how I am hindered by company there to do anything among my papers, I did resolve to go away today rather than stay to no purpose till tomorrow and so got all my things packed up and spent half an hour with <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Howe about his papers of accounts for contingencies and my Lord’s accounts, so took leave of my landlady and daughters, having paid dear for what time I have spent there, but yet having been quiet and my health, I am very well contented therewith. So with my wife and Mercer took boat and away home; but in the evening, before I went, comes <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Knipp, just to speake with me privately, to excuse her not coming to me yesterday, complaining how like a devil her husband treats her, but will be with us in town a weeke hence, and so I kissed her and parted. Being come home, my wife and I to look over our house and consider of laying out a little money to hang our bedchamber better than it is, and so resolved to go and buy something tomorrow, and so after supper, with great joy in my heart for my coming once again hither, to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1666-1-18" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1666-01-18">8th</time>. Up, and my wife and I by coach to Bennett’s, in Paternoster Row, few shops there being yet open, and there bought velvett for a coat, and camlet for a cloake for myself; and thence to a place to look over some fine counterfeit damasks to hang my wife’s closet, and pitched upon one, and so by coach home again, I calling at the ’Change, and so home to dinner and all the afternoon look after my papers at home and my office against tomorrow, and so after supper and considering the uselessness of laying out so much money upon my wife’s closet, but only the chamber, to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1666-1-19" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1666-01-19">9th</time>. Up, and then to the office, where we met first since the plague, which God preserve us in! At noon home to dinner, where uncle Thomas with me, and in comes Pierce lately come from Oxford, and Ferrers. After dinner Pierce and I up to my chamber, where he tells me how a great difference hath been between the Duke and Duchess, he suspecting her to be naught with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sidney.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2761" id="noteref-2761" epub:type="noteref">2761</a> But some way or other the matter is made up; but he was banished the Court, and the Duke for many days did not speak to the Duchess at all. He tells me that my Lord Sandwich is lost there at Court, though the King is particularly his friend. But people do speak everywhere slightly of him; which is a sad story to me, but I hope it may be better again. And that Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Carteret is neglected, and hath great enemies at work against him. That matters must needs go bad, while all the town, and every boy in the street, openly cries, “The King cannot go away till my Lady Castlemaine be ready to come along with him;” she being lately put to bed.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2762" id="noteref-2762" epub:type="noteref">2762</a> And that he visits her and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Stewart every morning before he eats his breakfast. All this put together makes me very sad, but yet I hope I shall do pretty well among them for all this, by my not meddling with either of their matters. He and Ferrers gone I paid uncle Thomas his last quarter’s money, and then comes <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gawden and he and I talked above stairs together a good while about his business, and to my great joy got him to declare that of the £500 he did give me the other day, none of it was for my Treasurership for Tangier (I first telling him how matters stand between Povy and I, that he was to have half of whatever was coming to me by that office), and that he will gratify me at 2 percent for that when he next receives any money. So there is £80 due to me more than I thought of. He gone I with a glad heart to the office to write, my letters and so home to supper and bed, my wife mighty full of her worke she hath to do in furnishing her bedchamber.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1666-1-20" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1666-01-20">10th</time>. Up, and by coach to Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Downing, where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gawden met me by agreement to talk upon the Act. I do find Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Downing to be a mighty talker, more than is true, which I now know to be so, and suspected it before, but for all that I have good grounds to think it will succeed for goods and in time for money too, but not presently. Having done with him, I to my Lord Brouncker’s house in Covent-Garden, and, among other things, it was to acquaint him with my paper of Pursers, and read it to him, and had his good liking of it. Showed him <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry’s sense of it, which he sent me last post much to my satisfaction. Thence to the ’Change, and there hear to our grief how the plague is increased this week from seventy to eighty-nine. We have also great fear of our Hambrough fleet, of their meeting the Dutch; as also have certain news, that by storms Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Jer.</abbr> Smith’s fleet is scattered, and three of them come without masts back to Plymouth, which is another very exceeding great disappointment,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2763" id="noteref-2763" epub:type="noteref">2763</a> and if the victualling ships are miscarried will tend to the losse of the garrison of Tangier. Thence home, in my way had the opportunity I longed for, of seeing and saluting <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Stokes, my little goldsmith’s wife in Paternoster Row, and there bespoke some thing, a silver chafing-dish for warming plates, and so home to dinner, found my wife busy about making her hangings for her chamber with the upholster. So I to the office and anon to the Duke of Albemarle, by coach at night, taking, for saving time, Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Warren with me, talking of our businesses all the way going and coming, and there got his reference of my pursers’ paper to the Board to consider of it before he reads it, for he will never understand it I am sure. Here I saw Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Coventry’s kind letter to him concerning my paper, and among others of his letters, which I saw all, and that is a strange thing, that whatever is writ to this Duke of Albemarle, all the world may see; for this very night he did give me <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry’s letter to read, soon as it come to his hand, before he had read it himself, and bid me take out of it what concerned the Navy, and many things there was in it, which I should not have thought fit for him to have let anybody so suddenly see; but, among other things, find him profess himself to the Duke a friend into the inquiring further into the business of Prizes, and advises that it may be public, for the righting the King, and satisfying the people and getting the blame to be rightly laid where it should be, which strikes very hard upon my Lord Sandwich, and troubles me to read it. Besides, which vexes me more, I heard the damned Duchess again say to twenty gentlemen publicly in the room, that she would have Montagu sent once more to sea, before he goes his Embassy, that we may see whether he will make amends for his cowardice, and repeated the answer she did give the other day in my hearing to Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Downing, wishing her Lord had been a coward, for then perhaps he might have been made an Embassador, and not been sent now to sea. But one good thing she said, she cried mightily out against the having of gentlemen Captains with feathers and ribbons, and wished the King would send her husband to sea with the old plain sea Captains, that he served with formerly, that would make their ships swim with blood, though they could not make legs<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2764" id="noteref-2764" epub:type="noteref">2764</a> as Captains nowadays can. It grieved me to see how slightly the Duke do everything in the world, and how the King and everybody suffers whatever he will to be done in the Navy, though never so much against reason, as in the business of recalling tickets, which will be done notwithstanding all the arguments against it. So back again to my office, and there to business and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1666-1-21" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1666-01-21">11th</time>. Up and to the office. By and by to the Custome House to the Farmers, there with a letter of Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Carteret’s for £3,000, which they ordered to be paid me. So away back again to the office, and at noon to dinner all of us by invitation to Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn’s, and much other company. Among others, Lieutenant of the Tower, and Broome, his poet,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2765" id="noteref-2765" epub:type="noteref">2765</a> and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Whistler, and his (Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn’s) son-in-law Lowder,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2766" id="noteref-2766" epub:type="noteref">2766</a> servant to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Margaret Penn, and Sir Edward Spragg, a merry man, that sang a pleasant song pleasantly. Rose from table before half dined, and with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mountney of the Custome House to the East India House, and there delivered to him tallies for £3,000 and received a note for the money on Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Viner. So ended the matter, and back to my company, where stayed a little, and thence away with my Lord Brouncker for discourse sake, and he and I to Gresham College to have seen <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hooke and a new invented chariott of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Wilkins, but met with nobody at home.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2767" id="noteref-2767" epub:type="noteref">2767</a> So to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Wilkins’s, where I never was before, and very kindly received and met with <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Merritt, and fine discourse among them to my great joy, so sober and so ingenious. He is now upon finishing his discourse of a universal character. So away and I home to my office about my letters, and so home to supper and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1666-1-22" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1666-01-22">12th</time>. By coach to the Duke of Albemarle, where Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten and I only met. Troubled at my heart to see how things are ordered there without consideration or understanding. Thence back by coach and called at Wotton’s, my shoemaker, lately come to town, and bespoke shoes, as also got him to find me a tailor to make me some clothes, my own being not yet in town, nor Pym, my Lord Sandwich’s tailor. So he helped me to a pretty man, one <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Penny, against <abbr>St.</abbr> Dunstan’s Church. Thence to the ’Change and there met <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore, newly come to town, and took him home to dinner with me and after dinner to talk, and he and I do conclude my Lord’s case to be very bad and may be worse, if he do not get a pardon for his doings about the prizes and his business at Bergen, and other things done by him at sea, before he goes for Spain. I do use all the art I can to get him to get my Lord to pay my cousin Pepys, for it is a great burden to my mind my being bound for my Lord in £1,000 to him. Having done discourse with him and directed him to go with my advice to my Lord express tomorrow to get his pardon perfected before his going, because of what I read the other night in Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Coventry’s letter, I to the office, and there had an extraordinary meeting of Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes, Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten, and Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn, and my Lord Brouncker and I to hear my paper read about pursers, which they did all of them with great good will and great approbation of my method and pains in all, only Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn, who must except against everything and remedy nothing, did except against my proposal for some reasons, which I could not understand, I confess, nor my Lord Brouncker neither, but he did detect indeed a failure or two of mine in my report about the ill condition of the present pursers, which I did magnify in one or two little things, to which, I think, he did with reason except, but at last with all respect did declare the best thing he ever heard of this kind, but when Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten did say, “Let us that do know the practical part of the Victualling meet Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes, Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn and I and see what we can do to mend all,” he was so far from offering or furthering it, that he declined it and said, he must be out of town. So as I ever knew him never did in his life ever attempt to mend anything, but suffer all things to go on in the way they are, though never so bad, rather than improve his experience to the King’s advantage. So we broke up, however, they promising to meet to offer some thing in it of their opinions, and so we rose, and I and my Lord Brouncker by coach a little way for discourse sake, till our coach broke, and tumbled me over him quite down the side of the coach, falling on the ground about the Stockes,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2768" id="noteref-2768" epub:type="noteref">2768</a> but up again, and thinking it fit to have for my honour some thing reported in writing to the Duke in favour of my pains in this, lest it should be thought to be rejected as frivolous, I did move it to my Lord, and he will see it done tomorrow. So we parted, and I to the office and thence home to my poor wife, who works all day at home like a horse, at the making of her hangings for our chamber and the bed. So to supper and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1666-1-23" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1666-01-23">13th</time>. At the office all the morning, where my Lord Brouncker moved to have something wrote in my matter as I desired him last night, and it was ordered and will be done next sitting. Home with his Lordship to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams’s, in Covent-Garden, to dinner (the first time I ever was there), and there met Captain Cocke; and pretty merry, though not perfectly so, because of the fear that there is of a great increase again of the plague this week. And again my Lord Brouncker do tell us, that he hath it from Sir John Baber,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2769" id="noteref-2769" epub:type="noteref">2769</a> who is related to my Lord Craven, that my Lord Craven do look after Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Carteret’s place, and do reckon himself sure of it. After dinner Cocke and I together by coach to the Exchange, in our way talking of our matters, and do conclude that everything must breake in pieces, while no better counsels govern matters than there seem to do, and that it will become him and I and all men to get their reckonings even, as soon as they can, and expect all to breake. Besides, if the plague continues among us another yeare, the Lord knows what will become of us. I set him down at the ’Change, and I home to my office, where late writing letters and doing business, and thence home to supper and to bed. My head full of cares, but pleased with my wife’s minding her worke so well, and busying herself about her house, and I trust in God if I can but clear myself of my Lord Sandwich’s bond, wherein I am bound with him for £1,000 to <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T.</abbr> Pepys, I shall do pretty well, come what will come.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1666-1-24" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1666-01-24">14th (Lord’s day)</time>. Long in bed, till raised by my new tailor, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Penny, [who] comes and brings me my new velvet coat, very handsome, but plain, and a day hence will bring me my camlet cloak. He gone I close to my papers and to set all in order and to perform my vow to finish my journall and other things before I kiss any woman more or drink any wine, which I must be forced to do tomorrow if I go to Greenwich as I am invited by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Boreman to hear <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Knipp sing, and I would be glad to go, so as we may be merry. At noon eat the second of the two cygnets <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shepley sent us for a new-year’s gift, and presently to my chamber again and so to work hard all day about my Tangier accounts, which I am going again to make up, as also upon writing a letter to my father about Pall, whom it is time now I find to think of disposing of while God Almighty hath given me something to give with her, and in my letter to my father I do offer to give her £450 to make her own £50 given her by my uncle up £500. I do also therein propose <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harman the upholster for a husband for her, to whom I have a great love and did heretofore love his former wife, and a civil man he is and careful in his way, beside, I like his trade and place he lives in, being Cornhill. Thus late at work, and so to supper and to bed. This afternoon, after sermon, comes my dear fair beauty of the Exchange, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Batelier, brought by her sister, an acquaintance of Mercer’s, to see my wife. I saluted her with as much pleasure as I had done any a great while. We sat and talked together an houre, with infinite pleasure to me, and so the fair creature went away, and proves one of the modestest women, and pretty, that ever I saw in my life, and my [wife] judges her so too.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1666-1-25" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1666-01-25">15th</time>. Busy all the morning in my chamber in my old cloth suit, while my usuall one is to my tailor’s to mend, which I had at noon again, and an answer to a letter I had sent this morning to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Pierce to go along with my wife and I down to Greenwich tonight upon an invitation to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Boreman’s to be merry to dance and sing with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Knipp. Being dressed, and having dined, I took coach and to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Pierce, to her new house in Covent-Garden, a very fine place and fine house. Took her thence home to my house, and so by water to Boreman’s by night, where the greatest disappointment that ever I saw in my life, much company, a good supper provided, and all come with expectation of excess of mirthe, but all blank through the waywardness of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Knipp, who, though she had appointed the night, could not be got to come. Not so much as her husband could get her to come; but, which was a pleasant thing in all my anger, I asking him, while we were in expectation what answer one of our many messengers would bring, what he thought, whether she would come or no, he answered that, for his part, he could not so much as think. By and by we all to supper, which the silly master of the feast commended, but, what with my being out of humour, and the badness of the meate dressed, I did never eat a worse supper in my life. At last, very late, and supper done, she came undressed, but it brought me no mirthe at all; only, after all being done, without singing, or very little, and no dancing, Pierce and I to bed together, and he and I very merry to find how little and thin clothes they give us to cover us, so that we were fain to lie in our stockings and drawers, and lay all our coates and clothes upon the bed. So to sleep.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1666-1-26" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1666-01-26">16th</time>. Up, and leaving the women in bed together (a pretty black and white) I to London to the office, and there forgot, through business, to bespeake any dinner for my wife and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Pierce. However, by noon they come, and a dinner we had, and Kate Joyce comes to see us, with whom very merry. After dinner she and I up to my chamber, who told me her business was chiefly for my advice about her husband’s leaving off his trade, which though I wish enough, yet I did advise against, for he is a man will not know how to live idle, and employment he is fit for none. Thence anon carried her and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Pierce home, and so to the Duke of Albemarle, and mighty kind he to me still. So home late at my letters, and so to bed, being mightily troubled at the news of the plague’s being increased, and was much the saddest news that the plague hath brought me from the beginning of it; because of the lateness of the year, and the fear, we may with reason have, of its continuing with us the next summer. The total being now 375, and the plague 158.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1666-1-27" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1666-01-27">17th</time>. Busy all the morning, settling things against my going out of town this night. After dinner, late took horse, having sent for Lashmore to go with me, and so he and I rode to Dagenhams in the dark. There find the whole family well. It was my Lord Crew’s desire that I should come, and chiefly to discourse with me of Lord Sandwich’s matters; and therein to persuade, what I had done already, that my Lord should sue out a pardon for his business of the prizes, as also for Bergen, and all he hath done this year past, before he begins his Embassy to Spain. For it is to be feared that the Parliament will fly out against him and particular men, the next Session. He is glad also that my Lord is clear of his sea-imployment, though sorry as I am, only in the manner of its bringing about. By and by to supper, my Lady Wright very kind. After supper up to wait on my Lady Crew, who is the same weake silly lady as ever, asking such saintly questions. Down to my Lord again and sat talking an houre or two, and anon to prayers the whole family, and then all to bed, I handsomely used, lying in the chamber <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Carteret formerly did, but sat up an houre talking sillily with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Carteret and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Marre, and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1666-1-28" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1666-01-28">18th</time>. Up before day and thence rode to London before office time, where I met a note at the door to invite me to supper to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Pierce’s because of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Knipp, who is in town and at her house. To the office, where, among other things, vexed with Major Norwood’s coming, who takes it ill my not paying a bill of Exchange of his, but I have good reason for it, and so the less troubled, but yet troubled, so as at noon being carried by my Lord Brouncker to Captain Cocke’s to dinner, where <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams was, and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Knipp, I was not heartily merry, though a glasse of wine did a little cheer me. After dinner to the office. Anon comes to me thither my Lord Brouncker, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Williams, and Knipp. I brought down my wife in her nightgown, she not being indeed very well, to the office to them and there by and by they parted all and my wife and I anon and Mercer, by coach, to Pierces; where mighty merry, and sing and dance with great pleasure; and I danced, who never did in company in my life, and Captain Cocke come for a little while and danced, but went away, but we stayed and had a pretty supper, and spent till two in the morning, but got home well by coach, though as dark as pitch, and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1666-1-29" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1666-01-29">19th</time>. Up and ready, called on by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moone, my Lord Bellases’ secretary, who and I good friends though I have failed him in some payments. Thence with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes to the Duke of Albemarle’s, and carried all well, and met Norwood but prevented him in desiring a meeting of the Commissioners for Tangier. Thence to look for Sir H. [Cholmly], but he not within, he coming to town last night. It is a remarkable thing how infinitely naked all that end of the town, Covent-Garden, is at this day of people; while the City is almost as full again of people as ever it was. To the ’Change and so home to dinner and the office, whither anon comes Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Cholmley to me, and he and I to my house, there to settle his accounts with me, and so with great pleasure we agreed and great friends become, I think, and he presented me upon the foot of our accounts for this year’s service for him £100, whereof Povy must have half. Thence to the office and wrote a letter to Norwood to satisfy him about my nonpayment of his bill, for that do still stick in my mind. So at night home to supper and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1666-1-30" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1666-01-30">20th</time>. To the office, where upon <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Kinaston’s coming to me about some business of Colonel Norwood’s, I sent my boy home for some papers, where, he staying longer than I would have him, and being vexed at the business and to be kept from my fellows in the office longer than was fit, I become angry, and boxed my boy when he came, that I do hurt my thumb so much, that I was not able to stir all the day after, and in great pain. At noon to dinner, and then to the office again, late, and so to supper and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1666-1-31" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1666-01-31">21st (Lord’s day)</time>. Lay almost till noon merrily and with pleasure talking with my wife in bed. Then up looking about my house, and the roome which my wife is dressing up, having new hung our bedchamber with blue, very handsome. After dinner to my Tangier accounts and there stated them against tomorrow very distinctly for the Lords to see who meet tomorrow, and so to supper and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1666-2-1" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1666-02-01">22nd</time>. Up, and set my people to work in copying Tangier accounts, and I down the river to Greenwich to the office to fetch away some papers and thence to Deptford, where by agreement my Lord Brouncker was to come, but stayed almost till noon, after I had spent an houre with <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Howe talking of my Lord Sandwich’s matters and his folly in minding his pleasures too much nowadays, and permitting himself to be governed by Cuttance to the displeasing of all the Commanders almost of the fleet, and thence we may conceive indeed the rise of all my Lord’s misfortunes of late. At noon my Lord Brouncker did come, but left the keys of the chests we should open, at Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Carteret’s lodgings, of my Lord Sandwich’s, wherein Howe’s supposed jewells are;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2770" id="noteref-2770" epub:type="noteref">2770</a> so we could not, according to my Lord Arlington’s order, see them today; but we parted, resolving to meet here at night: my Lord Brouncker being going with <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Wilkins, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hooke,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2771" id="noteref-2771" epub:type="noteref">2771</a> and others, to Colonel Blunt’s, to consider again of the business of charriots, and to try their new invention. Which I saw here my Lord Brouncker ride in; where the coachman sits astride upon a pole over the horse, but do not touch the horse, which is a pretty odde thing; but it seems it is most easy for the horse, and, as they say, for the man also. Thence I with speede by water home and eat a bit, and took my accounts and to the Duke of Albemarle, where for all I feared of Norwood he was very civil, and Sir Thomas Ingram beyond expectation, I giving them all content and I thereby settled mightily in my mind, for I was weary of the employment, and had had thoughts of giving it over. I did also give a good step in a business of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hubland’s, about getting a ship of his to go to Tangier, which during this strict embargo is a great matter, and I shall have a good reward for it, I hope. Thence by water in the dark down to Deptford, and there find my Lord Brouncker come and gone, having stayed long for me. I back presently to the Crown tavern behind the Exchange by appointment, and there met the first meeting of Gresham College since the plague. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Goddard did fill us with talk, in defence of his and his fellow physicians going out of town in the plague-time; saying that their particular patients were most gone out of town, and they left at liberty; and a great deal more, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> But what, among other fine discourse pleased me most, was Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Ent<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2772" id="noteref-2772" epub:type="noteref">2772</a> about Respiration; that it is not to this day known, or concluded on among physicians, nor to be done either, how the action is managed by nature, or for what use it is. Here late till poor <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Merriot<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2773" id="noteref-2773" epub:type="noteref">2773</a> was drunk, and so all home, and I to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1666-2-2" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1666-02-02">23rd</time>. Up and to the office and then to dinner. After dinner to the office again all the afternoon, and much business with me. Good news beyond all expectation of the decrease of the plague, being now but 79, and the whole but 272. So home with comfort to bed. A most furious storme all night and morning.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1666-2-3" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1666-02-03">24th</time>. By agreement my Lord Brouncker called me up, and though it was a very foule, windy, and rainy morning, yet down to the waterside we went, but no boat could go, the storme continued so. So my Lord to stay till fairer weather carried me into the Tower to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hore’s and there we stayed talking an houre, but at last we found no boats yet could go, so we to the office, where we met upon an occasion extraordinary of examining abuses of our clerkes in taking money for examining of tickets, but nothing done in it. Thence my Lord and I, the weather being a little fairer, by water to Deptford to Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Carteret’s house, where <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Howe met us, and there we opened the chests, and saw the poor sorry rubies which have caused all this ado to the undoing of <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Howe; though I am not much sorry for it, because of his pride and ill nature. About 200 of these very small stones, and a cod of muske (which it is strange I was not able to smell) is all we could find; so locked them up again, and my Lord and I, the wind being again very furious, so as we durst not go by water, walked to London quite round the bridge, no boat being able to stirre; and, Lord! what a dirty walk we had, and so strong the wind, that in the fields we many times could not carry our bodies against it, but were driven backwards. We went through Horsydowne, where I never was since a little boy, that I went to enquire after my father, whom we did give over for lost coming from Holland.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2774" id="noteref-2774" epub:type="noteref">2774</a> It was dangerous to walk the streets, the bricks and tiles falling from the houses that the whole streets were covered with them; and whole chimneys, nay, whole houses in two or three places, blowed down. But, above all, the pales on London-bridge on both sides were blown away, so that we were fain to stoop very low for fear of blowing off of the bridge. We could see no boats in the Thames afloat, but what were broke loose, and carried through the bridge, it being ebbing water. And the greatest sight of all was, among other parcels of ships driven here and there in clusters together, one was quite overset and lay with her masts all along in the water, and keel above water. So walked home, my Lord away to his house and I to dinner, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed being come to town and to dine with me, though now it was three o’clock. After dinner he and I to our accounts and very troublesome he is and with tricks which I found plainly and was vexed at; while we were together comes Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Downing with Colonel Norwood, Rumball,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2775" id="noteref-2775" epub:type="noteref">2775</a> and Warrupp to visit me. I made them drink good wine and discoursed above alone a good while with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Downing, who is very troublesome, and then with Colonel Norwood, who hath a great mind to have me concerned with him in everything; which I like, but am shy of adventuring too much, but will think of it. They gone, Creed and I to finish the settling his accounts. Thence to the office, where the Houblans and we discoursed upon a rubb which we have for one of the ships I hoped to have got to go out to Tangier for them. They being gone, I to my office-business late, and then home to supper and even sacke for lacke of a little wine, which I was forced to drink against my oathe, but without pleasure.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1666-2-4" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1666-02-04">25th</time>. Up and to the office, at noon home to dinner. So abroad to the Duke of Albemarle and Kate Joyce’s and her husband, with whom I talked a great deal about Pall’s business, and told them what portion I would give her, and they do mightily like of it and will proceed further in speaking with Harman, who hath already been spoke to about it, as from them only, and he is mighty glad of it, but doubts it may be an offence to me, if I should know of it, so thinks that it do come only from Joyce, which I like the better. So I do believe the business will go on, and I desire it were over. I to the office then, where I did much business, and set my people to work against furnishing me to go to Hampton Court, where the King and Duke will be on Sunday next. It is now certain that the King of France hath publicly declared war against us, and God knows how little fit we are for it. At night comes Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Warren, and he and I into the garden, and talked over all our businesses. He gives me good advice not to embarke into trade (as I have had it in my thoughts about Colonel Norwood) so as to be seen to mind it, for it will do me hurte, and draw my mind off from my business and embroile my estate too soon. So to the office business, and I find him as cunning a man in all points as ever I met with in my life and mighty merry we were in the discourse of our own trickes. So about 10 o’clock at night I home and stayed with him there settling my Tangier-Boates business and talking and laughing at the folly of some of our neighbours of this office till two in the morning and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1666-2-5" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1666-02-05">26th</time>. Up, and pleased mightily with what my poor wife hath been doing these eight or ten days with her own hands, like a drudge in fitting the new hangings of our bedchamber of blue, and putting the old red ones into my dressing-room, and so by coach to Whitehall, where I had just now notice that Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Carteret is come to town. He seems pleased, but I perceive he is heartily troubled at this Act, and the report of his losing his place, and more at my not writing to him to the prejudice of the Act. But I carry all fair to him and he to me. He bemoans the Kingdom as in a sad state, and with too much reason I doubt, having so many enemies about us and no friends abroad, nor money nor love at home. Thence to the Duke of Albemarle, and there a meeting with all the officers of the Navy, where, Lord! to see how the Duke of Albemarle flatters himself with false hopes of money and victuals and all without reason. Then comes the Committee of Tangier to sit, and I there carry all before me very well. Thence with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Bankes and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gawden to the ’Change, they both very wise men. After ’Change and agreeing with Houblon about our ships, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D.</abbr> Gawden and I to the Pope’s Head and there dined and little Chaplin (who a rich man grown). He gone after dinner, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D.</abbr> Gawden and I to talk of the Victualling business of the Navy in what posture it is, which is very sad also for want of money. Thence home to my chamber by oathe to finish my Journall. Here <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Hewer came to me with £320 from Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Warren, whereof £220 is got clearly by a late business of insurance of the Gottenburg ships, and the other £100 which was due and he had promised me before to give me to my very extraordinary joy, for which I ought and do bless God and so to my office, where late providing a letter to send to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gawden in a manner we concluded on today, and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1666-2-6" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1666-02-06">27th</time>. Up very betimes to finish my letter and writ it fair to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gawden, it being to demand several arrears in the present state of the victualling, partly to the King’s and partly to give him occasion to say something relating to the want of money on his own behalf. This done I to the office, where all the morning. At noon after a bit of dinner back to the office and there fitting myself in all points to give an account to the Duke and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry in all things, and in my Tangier business, till three o’clock in the morning, and so to bed,</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1666-2-7" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1666-02-07">28th</time>. And up again about six (Lord’s day), and being dressed in my velvett coat and plain cravatte took a hackney coach provided ready for me by eight o’clock, and so to my Lord Brouncker’s with all my papers, and there took his coach with four horses and away toward Hampton Court, having a great deal of good discourse with him, particularly about his coming to lie at the office, when I went further in inviting him to than I intended, having not yet considered whether it will be convenient for me or no to have him here so near us, and then of getting <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Evelyn or Sir Robert Murray into the Navy in the room of Sir Thomas Harvey. At Brainford I ’light, having need to shit, and went into an Inne door that stood open, found the house of office and used it, but saw no people, only after I was in the house, heard a great dog barke, and so was afeard how I should get safe back again, and therefore drew my sword and scabbard out of my belt to have ready in my hand, but did not need to use it, but got safe into the coach again, but lost my belt by the shift, not missing it till I come to Hampton Court. At the Wicke found Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes and Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten at a lodging provided for us by our messenger, and there a good dinner ready. After dinner took coach and to Court, where we find the King, and Duke, and Lords, all in council; so we walked up and down: there being none of the ladies come, and so much the more business I hope will be done. The Council being up, out comes the King, and I kissed his hand, and he grasped me very kindly by the hand. The Duke also, I kissed his, and he mighty kind, and Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Coventry. I found my Lord Sandwich there, poor man! I see with a melancholy face, and suffers his beard to grow on his upper lip more than usual. I took him a little aside to know when I should wait on him, and where: he told me, and that it would be best to meet at his lodgings, without being seen to walk together. Which I liked very well; and, Lord! to see in what difficulty I stand, that I dare not walk with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Coventry, for fear my Lord or Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Carteret should see me; nor with either of them, for fear Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Coventry should. After changing a few words with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Coventry, who assures me of his respect and love to me, and his concernment for my health in all this sickness, I went down into one of the Courts, and there met the King and Duke; and the Duke called me to him. And the King come to me of himself, and told me, “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pepys,” says he, “I do give you thanks for your good service all this year, and I assure you I am very sensible of it.” And the Duke of York did tell me with pleasure, that he had read over my discourse about pursers, and would have it ordered in my way, and so fell from one discourse to another. I walked with them quite out of the Court into the fields, and then back to my Lord Sandwich’s chamber, where I find him very melancholy and not well satisfied, I perceive, with my carriage to Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Carteret, but I did satisfy him and made him confess to me, that I have a very hard game to play; and told me he was sorry to see it, and the inconveniences which likely may fall upon me with him; but, for all that, I am not much afeard, if I can but keepe out of harm’s way in not being found too much concerned in my Lord’s or Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Carteret’s matters, and that I will not be if I can helpe it. He hath got over his business of the prizes, so far as to have a privy seale passed for all that was in his distribution to the officers, which I am heartily glad of; and, for the rest, he must be answerable for what he is proved to have. But for his pardon for anything else, he thinks it not seasonable to aske it, and not useful to him; because that will not stop a Parliament’s mouth, and for the King, he is sure enough of him. I did aske him whether he was sure of the interest and friendship of any great Ministers of State and he told me, yes. As we were going further, in comes my Lord Mandeville, so we were forced to breake off and I away, and to Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Coventry’s chamber, where he not come in but I find Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn, and he and I to discourse. I find him very much out of humour, so that I do not think matters go very well with him, and I am glad of it. He and I staying till late, and Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Coventry not coming in (being shut up close all the afternoon with the Duke of Albemarle), we took boat, and by water to Kingston, and so to our lodgings, where a good supper and merry, only I sleepy, and therefore after supper I slunk away from the rest to bed, and lay very well and slept soundly, my mind being in a great delirium between joy for what the King and Duke have said to me and Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Coventry, and trouble for my Lord Sandwich’s concernments, and how hard it will be for me to preserve myself from feeling thereof.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1666-2-8" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1666-02-08">29th</time>. Up, and to Court by coach, where to Council before the Duke of York, the Duke of Albemarle with us, and after Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Coventry had gone over his notes that he had provided with the Duke of Albemarle, I went over all mine with good success, only I fear I did once offend the Duke of Albemarle, but I was much joyed to find the Duke of York so much contending for my discourse about the pursers against Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn, who opposes it like a foole; my Lord Sandwich come in in the middle of the business, and, poor man, very melancholy, methought, and said little at all, or to the business, and sat at the lower end, just as he come, no roome being made for him, only I did give him my stoole, and another was reached me. After council done, I walked to and again up and down the house, discoursing with this and that man. Among others tooke occasion to thanke the Duke of York for his good opinion in general of my service, and particularly his favour in conferring on me the Victualling business. He told me that he knew nobody so fit as I for it, and next, he was very glad to find that to give me for my encouragement, speaking very kindly of me. So to Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Coventry’s to dinner with him, whom I took occasion to thanke for his favour and good thoughts of what little service I did, desiring he would do the last act of friendship in telling me of my faults also. He told me he would be sure he would do that also, if there were any occasion for it. So that as much as it is possible under so great a fall of my Lord Sandwich’s, and difference between them, I may conclude that I am thoroughly right with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Coventry. I dined with him with a great deal of company, and much merry discourse. I was called away before dinner ended to go to my company who dined at our lodgings. Thither I went with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Evelyn (whom I met) in his coach going that way, but finding my company gone, but my Lord Brouncker left his coach for me; so <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Evelyn and I into my Lord’s coach, and rode together with excellent discourse till we come to Clapham, talking of the vanity and vices of the Court, which makes it a most contemptible thing; and indeed in all his discourse I find him a most worthy person. Particularly he entertained me with discourse of an Infirmary, which he hath projected for the sick and wounded seamen against the next year, which I mightily approve of; and will endeavour to promote it, being a worthy thing, and of use, and will save money. He set me down at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gawden’s, where nobody yet come home, I having left him and his sons and Creed at Court, so I took a book and into the gardens, and there walked and read till dark with great pleasure, and then in and in comes Osborne, and he and I to talk of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Jaggard, who comes from London, and great hopes there is of a decrease this week also of the plague. Anon comes in Creed, and after that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gawden and his sons, and then they bringing in three ladies, who were in the house, but I do not know them, his daughter and two nieces, daughters of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Whistler’s, with whom and Creed mighty sport at supper, the ladies very pretty and mirthful. I perceive they know Creed’s gut and stomach as well as I, and made as much mirthe as I with it at supper. After supper I made the ladies sing, and they have been taught, but, Lord! though I was forced to commend them, yet it was the saddest stuff I ever heard. However, we sat up late, and then I, in the best chamber like a prince, to bed, and Creed with me, and being sleepy talked but little.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1666-2-9" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1666-02-09">30th</time>. Lay long till <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gawden was gone out being to take a little journey. Up, and Creed and I some good discourse, but with some trouble for the state of my Lord’s matters. After walking a turne or two in the garden, and bid good morrow to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gawden’s sons, and sent my service to the ladies, I took coach after <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gawden’s, and home, finding the town keeping the day solemnly, it being the day of the King’s murther, and they being at church, I presently into the church, thinking to see <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lethulier or Batelier, but did not, and a dull sermon of our young Lecturer, too bad. This is the first time I have been in this church since I left London for the plague, and it frighted me indeed to go through the church more than I thought it could have done, to see so [many] graves lie so high upon the churchyards where people have been buried of the plague.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2776" id="noteref-2776" epub:type="noteref">2776</a> I was much troubled at it, and do not think to go through it again a good while. So home to my wife, whom I find not well, in bed, and it seems hath not been well these two days. She rose and we to dinner, after dinner up to my chamber, where she entertained me with what she hath lately bought of clothes for herself, and Damask linnen, and other things for the house. I did give her a serious account how matters stand with me, of favour with the King and Duke, and of danger in reference to my Lord’s and Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Carteret’s falls, and the dissatisfaction I have heard the Duke of Albemarle hath acknowledged to somebody, among other things, against my Lord Sandwich, that he did bring me into the Navy against his desire and endeavour for another, which was our doting foole Turner. Thence from one discourse to another, and looking over my house, and other things I spent the day at home, and at night betimes to bed. After dinner this day I went down by water to Deptford, and fetched up what money there was of <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Howe’s contingencies in the chest there, being £516 13<abbr>s.</abbr> 3<abbr>d.</abbr> and brought it home to dispose of.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1666-2-10" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1666-02-10">31st</time>. Lay pretty long in bed, and then up and to the office, where we met on extraordinary occasion about the business of tickets. By and by to the ’Change, and there did several businesses, among others brought home my cousin Pepys, whom I appointed to be here today, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore met us upon the business of my Lord’s bond. Seeing my neighbour <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Knightly walk alone from the ’Change, his family being not yet come to town, I did invite him home with me, and he dined with me, a very sober, pretty man he is. He is mighty solicitous, as I find many about the City that live near the churchyards, to have the churchyards covered with lime, and I think it is needful, and ours I hope will be done. Good pleasant discourse at dinner of the practices of merchants to cheate the “Customers,” occasioned by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore’s being with much trouble freed of his prize goods, which he bought, which fell into the Customers’ hands, and with much ado hath cleared them. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Knightly being gone, my cousin Pepys and Moore and I to our business, being the clearing of my Lord Sandwich’s bond wherein I am bound with him to my cousin for £1,000 I have at last by my dexterity got my Lord’s consent to have it paid out of the money raised by his prizes. So the bond is cancelled, and he paid by having a note upon Sir Robert Viner, in whose hands I had lodged my Lord’s money, by which I am to my extraordinary comfort eased of a liableness to pay the sum in case of my Lord’s death, or troubles in estate, or my Lord’s greater fall, which God defend! Having settled this matter at Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Viner’s, I took up <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore (my cousin going home) and to my Lord Chancellor’s new house which he is building, only to view it, hearing so much from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Evelyn of it; and, indeed, it is the finest pile I ever did see in my life, and will be a glorious house.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2777" id="noteref-2777" epub:type="noteref">2777</a> Thence to the Duke of Albemarle, who tells me <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry is come to town and directs me to go to him about some business in hand, whether out of displeasure or desire of ease I know not; but I asked him not the reason of it but went to Whitehall, but could not find him there, though to my great joy people begin to bustle up and down there, the King holding his resolution to be in town tomorrow, and hath good encouragement, blessed be God! to do so, the plague being decreased this week to 56, and the total to 227. So after going to the Swan in the Palace, and sent for Spicer to discourse about my last Tangier tallies that have some of the words washed out with the rain, to have them new writ, I home, and there did some business and at the office, and so home to supper, and to bed.</p>
			</article>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
