<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>December 1660</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-12" epub:type="chapter z3998:diary">
			<h2 epub:type="title">December 1660</h2>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1660-12-11">
				<p><time datetime="1660-12-11">December 1st</time>. This morning, observing some things to be laid up not as they should be by the girl, I took a broom and basted her till she cried extremely, which made me vexed, but before I went out I left her appeased. So to Whitehall, where I found <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore attending for me at the Privy Seal, but nothing to do today. I went to my Lord <abbr>St.</abbr> Albans lodgings, and found him in bed, talking to a priest (he looked like one) that leaned along over the side of the bed, and there I desired to know his mind about making the catch stay longer, which I got ready for him the other day. He seems to be a fine civil gentleman. To my Lord’s, and did give up my audit of his accounts, which I had been then two days about, and was well received by my Lord. I dined with my Lord and Lady, and we had a venison pasty. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shepley and I went into London, and calling upon <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pinkney,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-822" id="noteref-822" epub:type="noteref">822</a> the goldsmith, he took us to the tavern, and gave us a pint of wine, and there fell into our company old <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Flower and another gentleman; who tell us how a Scotch knight was killed basely the other day at the Fleece in Covent Garden,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-823" id="noteref-823" epub:type="noteref">823</a> where there had been a great many formerly killed. So to Paul’s Churchyard, and there I took the little man at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Kirton’s and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shepley to Ringstead’s at the Star, and after a pint of wine I went home, my brains somewhat troubled with so much wine, and after a letter or two by the post I went to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1660-12-12">
				<p><time datetime="1660-12-12">2nd</time>.(Lord’s day). My head not very well, and my body out of order by last night’s drinking, which is my great folly. To church, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mills made a good sermon; so home to dinner. My wife and I all alone to a leg of mutton, the sawce of which being made sweet, I was angry at it, and eat none, but only dined upon the marrow bone that we had beside. To church in the afternoon, and after sermon took Tom Fuller’s Church History and read over Henry the 8th’s life in it, and so to supper and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1660-12-13">
				<p><time datetime="1660-12-13">3rd</time>. This morning I took a resolution to rise early in the morning, and so I rose by candle, which I have not done all this winter, and spent my morning in fiddling till time to go to the office, where Sir <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Carteret did begin again discourse on <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Holland’s proposition, which the King do take very ill, and so Sir George in lieu of that do propose that the seamen should have half in ready money and tickets for the other half, to be paid in three months after, which we judge to be very practicable. After office home to dinner, where come in my cozen Snow by chance, and I had a very good capon to dinner. So to the office till night, and so home, and then come <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Davis, of Deptford (the first time that ever he was at my house), and after him <abbr>Mons.</abbr> L’Impertinent, who is to go to Ireland tomorrow, and so came to take his leave of me. They both found me under the barber’s hand; but I had a bottle of good sack in the house, and so made them very welcome. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Davis sat with me a good while after the other was gone, talking of his hard usage and of the endeavour to put him out of his place in the time of the late Commissioners, and he do speak very highly of their corruption. After he was gone I fell a reading <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play" xml:lang="la">Cornelianum dolium</i> till 11 o’clock at night with great pleasure, and after that to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1660-12-14">
				<p><time datetime="1660-12-14">4th</time>. To Whitehall to Sir <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Carteret’s chamber, where all the officers met, and so we went up to the Duke of York, and he took us into his closet, and we did open to him our project of stopping the growing charge of the fleet by paying them in hand one moyety, and the other four months hence. This he do like, and we returned by his order to Sir <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Carteret’s chamber, and there we did draw up this design in order to be presented to the Parliament. From thence I to my Lord’s, and dined with him and told him what we had done today. Sir <abbr class="name">Tho.</abbr> Crew dined with my Lord today, and we were very merry with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Borfett, who dined there still as she has always done lately. After dinner Sir <abbr class="name">Tho.</abbr> and my Lady to the Playhouse to see <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Silent Woman</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-824" id="noteref-824" epub:type="noteref">824</a> I home by water, and with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hater in my chamber all alone he and I did put this morning’s design into order, which being done I did carry it to Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten, where I found some gentlemen with him (Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen among the rest pretty merry with drink) playing at cards, and there I staid looking upon them till one o’clock in the morning, and so Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen and I went away, and I to bed. This day the Parliament voted that the bodies of Oliver, Ireton, Bradshaw, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, should be taken up out of their graves in the Abbey,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-825" id="noteref-825" epub:type="noteref">825</a> and drawn to the gallows, and there hanged and buried under it: which (methinks) do trouble me that a man of so great courage as he was, should have that dishonour, though otherwise he might deserve it enough.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1660-12-15">
				<p><time datetime="1660-12-15">5th</time>. This morning the Proposal which I wrote the last night I showed to the officers this morning, and was well liked of, and I wrote it fair for Sir. <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Carteret to show to the King, and so it is to go to the Parliament. I dined at home, and after dinner I went to the new Theatre<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-826" id="noteref-826" epub:type="noteref">826</a> and there I saw <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Merry Wives of Windsor</i> acted, the humours of the country gentleman and the French doctor very well done, but the rest but very poorly, and Sir <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Falstaffe<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-827" id="noteref-827" epub:type="noteref">827</a> as bad as any. From thence to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">Will.</abbr> Montagu’s chamber to have sealed some writings tonight between Sir <abbr class="name">R.</abbr> Parkhurst and myself about my Lord’s £2,000, but he not coming, I went to my father’s and there found my mother still ill of the stone, and had just newly voided one, which she had let drop into the chimney, and looked and found it to show it me. From thence home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1660-12-16">
				<p><time datetime="1660-12-16">6th</time>. This morning some of the Commissioners of Parliament and Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten went to Sir <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Carteret’s office here in town, and paid off the Chesnut. I carried my wife to White Friars and landed her there, and myself to Whitehall to the Privy Seal, where abundance of pardons to seal, but I was much troubled for it because that there are no fees now coming for them to me. Thence <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore and I alone to the Leg in King Street, and dined together on a neat’s tongue and udder. From thence by coach to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s to my Lord, who told me of his going out of town tomorrow to settle the militia in Huntingdonshire, and did desire me to lay up a box of some rich jewels and things that there are in it, which I promised to do. After much free discourse with my Lord, who tells me his mind as to his enlarging his family, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, and desiring me to look him out a Master of the Horse and other servants, we parted. From thence I walked to Greatorex (he was not within), but there I met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Jonas Moore,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-828" id="noteref-828" epub:type="noteref">828</a> and took him to the Five Bells,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-829" id="noteref-829" epub:type="noteref">829</a> and drank a glass of wine and left him. To the Temple, when Sir <abbr class="name">R.</abbr> Parkhurst (as was intended the last night) did seal the writings, and is to have the £2,000 told tomorrow. From, thence by water to Parliament Stairs, and there at an alehouse to Doling (who is suddenly to go into Ireland to venture his fortune); Simonds (who is at a great loss for £200 present money, which I was loth to let him have, though I could now do it, and do love him and think him honest and sufficient, yet lothness to part with money did dissuade me from it); Luellin (who was very drowsy from a dose that he had got the last night), <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mount and several others, among the rest one <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierce, an army man, who did make us the best sport for songs and stories in a Scotch tone (which he do very well) that ever I heard in my life. I never knew so good a companion in all my observation. From thence to the bridge by water, it being a most pleasant moonshine night, with a waterman who did tell such a company of bawdy stories, how once he carried a lady from Putney in such a night as this, and she bade him lie down by her, which he did, and did give her content, and a great deal more roguery. Home and found my girl knocking at the door (it being 11 o’clock at night), her mistress having sent her out for some trivial business, which did vex me when I came in, and so I took occasion to go up and to bed in a pet. Before I went forth this morning, one came to me to give me notice that the justices of Middlesex do meet tomorrow at Hicks Hall,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-830" id="noteref-830" epub:type="noteref">830</a> and that I as one am desired to be there, but I fear I cannot be there though I much desire it.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1660-12-17">
				<p><time datetime="1660-12-17">7th</time>. This morning the judge Advocate Fowler came to see me, and he and I sat talking till it was time to go to the office. To the office and there staid till past 12 o’clock, and so I left the Comptroller and Surveyor and went to Whitehall to my Lord’s, where I found my Lord gone this morning to Huntingdon, as he told me yesterday he would. I staid and dined with my Lady, there being Laud the page’s mother<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-831" id="noteref-831" epub:type="noteref">831</a> there, and dined also with us, and seemed to have been a very pretty woman and of good discourse. Before dinner I examined Laud in his Latin and found him a very pretty boy and gone a great way in Latin. After dinner I took a box of some things of value that my Lord had left for me to carry to the Exchequer, which I did, and left them with my Brother Spicer, who also had this morning paid £1,000 for me by appointment to Sir <abbr class="name">R.</abbr> Parkhurst. So to the Privy Seal, where I signed a deadly number of pardons, which do trouble me to get nothing by. Home by water, and there was much pleased to see that my little room is likely to come to be finished soon. I fell a-reading Fuller’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Abbys</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-832" id="noteref-832" epub:type="noteref">832</a> and my wife in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Great Cyrus</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-833" id="noteref-833" epub:type="noteref">833</a> till twelve at night, and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1660-12-18">
				<p><time datetime="1660-12-18">8th</time>. To Whitehall to the Privy Seal, and thence to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierces the Surgeon to tell them that I would call by and by to go to dinner. But I going into Westminster Hall met with Sir <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Carteret and Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen (who were in a great fear that we had committed a great error of £100,000 in our late account gone into the Parliament in making it too little), and so I was fain to send order to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierces to come to my house; and also to leave the key of the chest with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Spicer; wherein my Lord’s money is, and went along with Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen by water to the office, and there with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Huchinson we did find that we were in no mistake. And so I went to dinner with my wife and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Pierce the Surgeon to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierce, the Purser (the first time that ever I was at his house) who does live very plentifully and finely. We had a lovely chine of beef and other good things very complete and drank a great deal of wine, and her daughter played after dinner upon the virginals,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-834" id="noteref-834" epub:type="noteref">834</a> and at night by lanthorn home again, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierce and his wife being gone home I went to bed, having drunk so much wine that my head was troubled and was not very well all night, and the wind I observed was rose exceedingly before I went to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1660-12-19">
				<p><time datetime="1660-12-19">9th (Lord’s day)</time>. Being called up early by Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten I rose and went to his house and he told me the ill news that he had this morning from Woolwich, that the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Assurance</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-835" id="noteref-835" epub:type="noteref">835</a> (formerly Captain Holland’s ship, and now Captain Stoakes’s,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-836" id="noteref-836" epub:type="noteref">836</a> designed for Guiny and manned and victualled), was by a gust of wind sunk down to the bottom. Twenty men drowned. Sir Williams both went by barge thither to see how things are, and I am sent to the Duke of York to tell him, and by boat with some other company going to Whitehall from the Old Swan. I went to the Duke. And first calling upon <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry at his chamber, I went to the Duke’s bedside, who had sat up late last night, and lay long this morning, who was much surprised, therewith. This being done I went to chappell, and sat in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blagrave’s pew, and there did sing my part along with another before the King, and with much ease. From thence going to my Lady I met with a letter from my Lord (which Andrew had been at my house to bring me and missed me), commanding me to go to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Denham,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-837" id="noteref-837" epub:type="noteref">837</a> to get a man to go to him tomorrow to Hinchinbroke, to contrive with him about some alterations in his house, which I did and got <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Kennard.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-838" id="noteref-838" epub:type="noteref">838</a> Dined with my Lady and staid all the afternoon with her, and had infinite of talk of all kind of things, especially of beauty of men and women, with which she seems to be much pleased to talk of. From thence at night to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Kennard and took him to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Denham, the Surveyor’s. Where, while we could not speak with him, his chief man (<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cooper) did give us a cup of good sack. From thence with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Kennard to my Lady who is much pleased with him, and after a glass of sack there; we parted, having taken order for a horse or two for him and his servant to be gone tomorrow. So to my father’s, where I sat while they were at supper, and I found my mother below, stairs and pretty well. Thence home, where I hear that the Comptroller had some business with me, and (with Giffin’s lanthorn) I went to him and there staid in discourse an hour ’till late, and among other things he showed me a design of his, by the King’s making an Order of Knights of the Sea,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-839" id="noteref-839" epub:type="noteref">839</a> to give an encouragement for persons of honour to undertake the service of the sea, and he had done it with great pains and very ingeniously. So home and to prayers and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1660-12-20">
				<p><time datetime="1660-12-20">10th</time>. Up exceedingly early to go to the Comptroller, but he not being up and it being a very fine, bright, moonshine morning I went and walked all alone twenty turns in Cornhill, from Gracious Street corner to the Stockes<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-840" id="noteref-840" epub:type="noteref">840</a> and back again, from 6 o’clock till past 7, so long that I was weary, and going to the Comptroller’s thinking to find him ready, I found him gone, at which I was troubled, and being weary went home, and from thence with my wife by water to Westminster, and put her to my father Bowyer’s (they being newly come out of the country), but I could not stay there, but left her there. I to the Hall and there met with <abbr>Col.</abbr> Slingsby. So hearing that the Duke of York is gone down this morning, to see the ship sunk yesterday at Woolwich, he and I returned by his coach to the office, and after that to dinner. After dinner he came to me again and sat with me at my house, ands among other discourse he told me that it is expected that the Duke will marry the Lord Chancellor’s daughter at last which is likely to be the ruin of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Davis and my Lord Barkley, who have carried themselves so high against the Chancellor; Sir <abbr class="name">Chas.</abbr> Barkley swearing that he and others had lain with her often, which all believe to be a lie.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-841" id="noteref-841" epub:type="noteref">841</a> He and I in the evening to the Coffee House in Cornhill, the first time that ever I was there, and I found much pleasure in it, through the diversity of company and discourse. Home and found my wife at my Lady Batten’s, and have made a bargain to go see the ship sunk at Woolwich, where both the Sir Williams are still since yesterday, and I do resolve to go along with them. From thence home and up to bed, having first been into my study, and to ease my mind did go to cast up how my cash stands, and I do find as near as I can that I am worth in money clear £240, for which God be praised. This afternoon there was a couple of men with me with a book in each of their hands, demanding money for pollmoney,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-842" id="noteref-842" epub:type="noteref">842</a> and I overlooked the book and saw myself set down Samuel Pepys, <abbr>gent.</abbr> 10<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> for himself and for his servants 2<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr>, which I did presently pay without any dispute, but I fear I have not escaped so, and therefore I have long ago laid by £10 for them, but I think I am not bound to discover myself.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1660-12-21">
				<p><time datetime="1660-12-21">11th</time>. My wife and I up very early this day, and though the weather was very bad and the wind high, yet my Lady Batten and her maid and we two did go by our barge to Woolwich (my Lady being very fearfull) where we found both Sir Williams and much other company, expecting the weather to be better, that they might go about weighing up the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Assurance</i>, which lies there (poor ship, that I have been twice merry in, in <abbr>Captn.</abbr> Holland’s time,) under water, only the upper deck may be seen and the masts. Captain Stoakes is very melancholy, and being in search for some clothes and money of his, which he says he hath lost out of his cabin. I did the first office of a justice of Peace to examine a seaman thereupon, but could find no reason to commit him. This last tide the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Kingsale</i> was also run aboard and lost her mainmast, by another ship, which makes us think it ominous to the Guiny voyage, to have two of her ships spoilt before they go out. After dinner, my Lady being very fearfull she staid and kept my wife there, and I and another gentleman, a friend of Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen’s, went back in the barge, very merry by the way, as far as Whitehall in her. To the Privy Seal, where I signed many pardons and some few things else. From thence <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore and I into London to a tavern near my house, and there we drank and discoursed of ways how to put out a little money to the best advantage, and at present he has persuaded me to put out £250 for £50 per annum for eight years, and I think I shall do it. Thence home, where I found the wench washing, and I up to my study, and there did make up an even £100, and sealed it to lie by. After that to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1660-12-22">
				<p><time datetime="1660-12-22">12th</time>. Troubled with the absence of my wife. This morning I went (after the Comptroller and I had sat an hour at the office) to Whitehall to dine with my Lady, and after dinner to the Privy Seal and sealed abundance of pardons and little else. From thence to the Exchequer and did give my mother Bowyer a visit and her daughters, the first time that I have seen them since I went last to sea. From thence up with <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Spicer to his office and took £100, and by coach with it as far as my father’s, where I called to see them, and my father did offer me six pieces of gold,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-843" id="noteref-843" epub:type="noteref">843</a> in lieu of six pounds that he borrowed of me the other day, but it went against me to take it of him and therefore did not, though I was afterwards a little troubled that I did not. Thence home, and took out this £100 and sealed it up with the other last night, it being the first £200 that ever I saw together of my own in my life. For which God be praised. So to my Lady Batten, and sat an hour or two, and talked with her daughter and people in the absence of her father and mother and my wife to pass away the time. After that home and to bed, reading myself asleep, while the wench sat mending my breeches by my bedside.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1660-12-23">
				<p><time datetime="1660-12-23">13th</time>. All the day long looking upon my workmen who this day began to paint my parlour. Only at noon my Lady Batten and my wife came home, and so I stepped to my Lady’s, where were Sir John Lawson and Captain Holmes, and there we dined and had very good red wine of my Lady’s own making in England.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1660-12-24">
				<p><time datetime="1660-12-24">14th</time>. Also all this day looking upon my workmen. Only met with the Comptroller at the office a little both forenoon and afternoon, and at night step a little with him to the Coffee House<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-844" id="noteref-844" epub:type="noteref">844</a> where we light upon very good company and had very good discourse concerning insects and their having a generative faculty as well as other creatures. This night in discourse the Comptroller told me among other persons that were heretofore the principal officers of the Navy, there was one Sir Peter Buck,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-845" id="noteref-845" epub:type="noteref">845</a> a Clerk of the Acts, of which to myself I was not a little proud.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1660-12-25">
				<p><time datetime="1660-12-25">15th</time>. All day at home looking upon my workmen, only at noon <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore came and brought me some things to sign for the Privy Seal and dined with me. We had three eels that my wife and I bought this morning of a man, that cried them about, for our dinner, and that was all I did today.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1660-12-26">
				<p><time datetime="1660-12-26">16th</time>. In the morning to church, and then dined at home. In the afternoon I to White Hall, where I was surprised with the news of a plot against the King’s person and my Lord Monk’s; and that since last night there are about forty taken up on suspicion; and, amongst others, it was my lot to meet with Simon Beale,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-846" id="noteref-846" epub:type="noteref">846</a> the Trumpeter, who took me and Tom Doling into the Guard in Scotland Yard, and showed us Major-General Overton, where I heard him deny that he is guilty of any such things; but that whereas it is said that he is found to have brought many arms to town, he says it is only to sell them, as he will prove by oath. From thence with Tom Doling and Boston and <abbr class="name">D.</abbr> Vines (whom we met by the way) to Price’s, and there we drank, and in discourse I learnt a pretty trick to try whether a woman be a maid or no, by a string going round her head to meet at the end of her nose, which if she be not will come a great way beyond. Thence to my Lady’s and staid with her an hour or two talking of the Duke of York and his lady, the Chancellor’s daughter, between whom, she tells me, that all is agreed and he will marry her. But I know not how true yet. It rained hard, and my Lady would have had me have the coach, but I would not, but to my father’s, where I met my wife, and there supped, and after supper by link home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1660-12-27">
				<p><time datetime="1660-12-27">17th</time>. All day looking after my workmen, only in the afternoon to the office where both Sir Williams were come from Woolwich, and tell us that, contrary to their expectations, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Assurance</i> is got up, without much damage to her body, only to the goods that she hath within her, which argues her to be a strong, good ship. This day my parlour is gilded, which do please me well.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1660-12-28">
				<p><time datetime="1660-12-28">18th</time>. All day at home, without stirring at all, looking after my workmen.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1660-12-29">
				<p><time datetime="1660-12-29">19th</time>. At noon I went and dined with my Lady at Whitehall, and so back again to the office, and after that home to my workmen. This night <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gauden sent me a great chine of beef and half a dozen of tongues.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1660-12-30">
				<p><time datetime="1660-12-30">20th</time>. All day at home with my workmen, that I may get all done before Christmas. This day I hear that the Princess Royal has the small pox.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1660-12-31">
				<p><time datetime="1660-12-31">21st</time>. By water to Whitehall (leaving my wife at Whitefriars going to my father’s to buy her a muff and mantle), there I signed many things at the Privy Seal, and carried £200 from thence to the Exchequer, and laid it up with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hales, and afterwards took him and <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Bowyer to the Swan and drank with them. They told me that this is <abbr>St.</abbr> Thomas’s, and that by an old custom, this day the Exchequer men had formerly, and do intend this night to have a supper; which if I could I promised to come to, but did not. To my Lady’s, and dined with her: she told me how dangerously ill the Princess Royal is and that this morning she was said to be dead. But she hears that she hath married herself to young Jermyn,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-847" id="noteref-847" epub:type="noteref">847</a> which is worse than the Duke of York’s marrying the Chancellor’s daughter, which is now publicly owned. After dinner to the office all the afternoon. At seven at night I walked through the dirt to Whitehall to see whether my Lord be come to town, and I found him come and at supper, and I supped with him. He tells me that my aunt at Brampton has voided a great stone (the first time that ever I heard she was troubled therewith) and cannot possibly live long, that my uncle is pretty well, but full of pain still. After supper home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1661-01-01">
				<p><time datetime="1661-01-01">22nd</time>. All the morning with my painters, who will make an end of all this day I hope. At noon I went to the Sun tavern; on Fish Street hill, to a dinner of <abbr>Captn.</abbr> Teddimans, where was my Lord Inchiquin<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-848" id="noteref-848" epub:type="noteref">848</a> (who seems to be a very fine person), Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen, <abbr>Captn.</abbr> Cuttance, and one <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lawrence<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-849" id="noteref-849" epub:type="noteref">849</a> (a fine gentleman now going to Algiers), and other good company, where we had a very fine dinner, good musique, and a great deal of wine. We staid here very late, at last Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen and I home together, he so overcome with wine that he could hardly go; I was forced to lead him through the streets and he was in a very merry and kind mood. I home (found my house clear of the workmen and their work ended), my head troubled with wine, and I very merry went to bed, my head akeing all night.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1661-01-02">
				<p><time datetime="1661-01-02">23rd (Lord’s day)</time>. In the morning to Church, where our pew all covered with rosemary and baize. A stranger made a dull sermon. Home and found my wife and maid with much ado had made shift to spit a great turkey sent me this week from Charles Carter, my old colleague, now minister in Huntingdonshire, but not at all roasted, and so I was fain to stay till two o’clock, and after that to church with my wife, and a good sermon there was, and so home. All the evening at my book, and so to supper and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1661-01-03">
				<p><time datetime="1661-01-03">24th</time>. In the morning to the office and Commissioner Pett (who seldom comes there) told me that he had lately presented a piece of plate (being a couple of flaggons) to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry, but he did not receive them, which also put me upon doing the same too; and so after dinner I went and chose a payre of candlesticks to be made ready for me at Alderman Backwell’s. To the office again in the afternoon till night, and so home, and with the painters till 10 at night, making an end of my house and the arch before my door, and so this night I was rid of them and all other work, and my house was made ready against tomorrow being Christmas day. This day the Princess Royal died at Whitehall.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1661-01-04">
				<p><time datetime="1661-01-04">25th (Christmas day)</time>. In the morning very much pleased to see my house once more clear of workmen and to be clean, and indeed it is so, far better than it was that I do not repent of my trouble that I have been at. In the morning to church, where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mills made a very good sermon. After that home to dinner, where my wife and I and my brother Tom (who this morning came to see my wife’s new mantle put on, which do please me very well), to a good shoulder of mutton and a chicken. After dinner to church again, my wife and I, where we had a dull sermon of a stranger, which made me sleep, and so home, and I, before and after supper, to my lute and Fuller’s History, at which I staid all alone in my chamber till 12 at night, and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1661-01-05">
				<p><time datetime="1661-01-05">26th</time>. In the morning to Alderman Backwell’s for the candlesticks for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry, but they being not done I went away, and so by coach to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s, and there took some money of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore’s for my Lord, and so to my Lord’s, where I found Sir Thomas Bond<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-850" id="noteref-850" epub:type="noteref">850</a> (whom I never saw before) with a message from the Queen about vessells for the carrying over of her goods, and so with him to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry, and thence to the office (being soundly washed going through the bridge) to Sir <abbr class="name">Wm.</abbr> Batten and Pen (the last of whom took physic today), and so I went up to his chamber, and there having made an end of the business I returned to White Hall by water, and dined with my Lady Sandwich, who at table did tell me how much fault was laid upon <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Frazer<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-851" id="noteref-851" epub:type="noteref">851</a> and the rest of the Doctors, for the death of the Princess.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-852" id="noteref-852" epub:type="noteref">852</a> My Lord did dine this day with Sir Henry Wright, in order to his going to sea with the Queen. Thence to my father Bowyer’s where I met my wife, and with her home by water.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1661-01-06">
				<p><time datetime="1661-01-06">27th</time>. In the morning to Alderman Backwell’s again, where I found the candlesticks done, and went along with him in his coach to my Lord’s and left the candlesticks with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shepley. I staid in the garden talking much with my Lord, who do show me much of his love and do communicate his mind in most things to me, which is my great content. Home and with my wife to Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten’s to dinner, where much and good company. My wife not very well went home, I staid late there seeing them play at cards, and so home to bed. This afternoon there came in a strange lord to Sir William Batten’s by a mistake and enters discourse with him, so that we could not be rid of him till Sir <abbr class="name">Arn.</abbr> Breames and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bens and Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen fell a-drinking to him till he was drunk, and so sent him away. About the middle of the night I was very ill⁠—I think with eating and drinking too much⁠—and so I was forced to call the maid, who pleased my wife and I in her running up and down so innocently in her smock, and vomited in the bason, and so to sleep, and in the morning was pretty well, only got cold, and so had pain … as I used to have.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1661-01-07">
				<p><time datetime="1661-01-07">28th</time>. Office day. There all the morning. Dined at home alone with my wife, and so staid within all the afternoon and evening; at my lute, with great pleasure, and so to bed with great content.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1661-01-08">
				<p><time datetime="1661-01-08">29th</time>. Within all the morning. Several people to speak with me; <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shepley for £100; <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Kennard and Warren,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-853" id="noteref-853" epub:type="noteref">853</a> the merchant, about deals for my Lord. Captain Robert Blake lately come from the Straights about some Florence Wine for my Lord, and with him I went to Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen, who offering me a barrel of oysters I took them both home to my house (having by chance a good piece of roast beef at the fire for dinner), and there they dined with me, and sat talking all the afternoon-good company. Thence to Alderman Backwell’s and took a brave state-plate and cupp in lieu of the candlesticks that I had the other day and carried them by coach to my Lord’s and left them there. And so back to my father’s and saw my mother, and so to my uncle Fenner’s, whither my father came to me, and there we talked and drank, and so away; I home with my father, he telling me what bad wives both my cozen Joyces make to their husbands, which I much wondered at. After talking of my sister’s coming to me next week, I went home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1661-01-09">
				<p><time datetime="1661-01-09">30th (Lord’s day)</time>. Lay long in bed, and being up, I went with Will to my Lord’s, calling in at many churches in my way. There I found <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shepley, in his Venetian cap, taking physique in his chamber, and with him I sat till dinner. My Lord dined abroad and my Lady in her chamber, so <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hetly, Child and I dined together, and after dinner <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Child and I spent some time at the lute, and so promising to prick me some lessons to my theorbo he went away to see Henry Laws, who lies very sick. I to the Abby and walked there, seeing the great confusion of people that come there to hear the organs. So home, calling in at my father’s, but staid not, my father and mother being both forth. At home I fell a-reading of Fuller’s Church History till it was late, and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1661-01-10">
				<p><time datetime="1661-01-10">31st</time>. At the office all the morning and after that home, and not staying to dine I went out, and in Paul’s Churchyard I bought the play of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Henry the Fourth</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-854" id="noteref-854" epub:type="noteref">854</a> and so went to the new Theatre (only calling at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s and eat a bit with the people there at dinner) and saw it acted; but my expectation being too great, it did not please me, as otherwise I believe it would; and my having a book, I believe did spoil it a little. That being done I went to my Lord’s, where I found him private at cards with my Lord Lauderdale and some persons of honour. So <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shepley and I over to Harper’s, and there drank a pot or two, and so parted. My boy taking a cat home with him from my Lord’s, which Sarah had given him for my wife, we being much troubled with mice. At Whitehall inquiring for a coach, there was a Frenchman with one eye that was going my way, so he and I hired the coach between us and he set me down in Fenchurch Street. Strange how the fellow, without asking, did tell me all what he was, and how he had ran away from his father and come into England to serve the King, and now going back again. Home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
