<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>April 1662</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-28" epub:type="chapter z3998:diary">
			<h2 epub:type="title">April 1662</h2>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-4-1">April 1st</time>. Within all the morning and at the office. At noon my wife and I (having paid our maid Nell her whole wages, who has been with me half a year, and now goes away for altogether) to the Wardrobe, where my Lady and company had almost dined. We sat down and dined. Here was <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Herbert, son to Sir Charles Herbert, that lately came with letters from my Lord Sandwich to the King. After some discourse we remembered one another to have been together at the tavern when <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fanshaw took his leave of me at his going to Portugall with Sir Richard. After dinner he and I and the two young ladies and my wife to the playhouse, the Opera, and saw <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Mayde in the Mill</i>, a pretty good play. In the middle of the play my Lady Paulina, who had taken physique this morning, had need to go forth, and so I took the poor lady out and carried her to the Grange, and there sent the maid of the house into a room to her, and she did what she had a mind to, and so back again to the play; and that being done, in their coach I took them to Islington, and then, after a walk in the fields, I took them to the great cheesecake house and entertained them, and so home, and after an hour’s stay with my Lady, their coach carried us home, and so weary to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-4-2">2nd</time>. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore came to me, and he and I walked to the Spittle an hour or two before my Lord Mayor and the blewcoat boys come, which at last they did, and a fine sight of charity it is indeed. We got places and staid to hear a sermon; but, it being a Presbyterian one, it was so long, that after above an hour of it we went away, and I home and dined; and then my wife and I by water to the Opera, and there saw <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Bondman</i> most excellently acted; and though we had seen it so often, yet I never liked it better than today, Ianthe acting Cleora’s part very well now Roxalana is gone. We are resolved to see no more plays till Whitsuntide, we having been three days together. Met <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sanchy, Smithes; Gale, and Edlin at the play, but having no great mind to spend money, I left them there. And so home and to supper, and then dispatch business, and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-4-3">3rd</time>. At home and at the office all day. At night to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-4-4">4th</time>. By barge Sir George, Sir Williams both and I to Deptford, and there fell to pay off the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Drake</i> and <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Hampshire</i>, then to dinner, Sir George to his lady at his house, and Sir <abbr class="name">Wm.</abbr> Pen to Woolwich, and Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten and I to the tavern, where much company came to us and our dinner, and somewhat short by reason of their taking part away with them. Then to pay the rest of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Hampshire</i> and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Paradox</i>, and were at it till 9 at night, and so by night home by barge safe, and took Tom Hater with some that the clerks had to carry home along with us in the barge, the rest staying behind to pay tickets, but came home after us that night. So being come home, to bed. I was much troubled today to see a dead man lie floating upon the waters, and had done (they say) these four days, and nobody takes him up to bury him, which is very barbarous.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-4-5">5th</time>. At the office till almost noon, and then broke up. Then came Sir <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Carteret, and he and I walked together alone in the garden, taking notice of some faults in the office, particularly of Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten’s, and he seemed to be much pleased with me, and I hope will be the ground of a future interest of mine in him, which I shall be glad of. Then with my wife abroad, she to the Wardrobe and there dined, and I to the Exchange and so to the Wardrobe, but they had dined. After dinner my wife and the two ladies to see my aunt Wight, and thence met me at home. From thence (after Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten and I had viewed our houses with a workman in order to the raising of our roofs higher to enlarge our houses) I went with them by coach first to Moorfields and there walked, and thence to Islington and had a fine walk in the fields there, and so, after eating and drinking, home with them, and so by water with my wife home, and after supper to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-4-6">6th (Lord’s day)</time>. By water to White Hall, to Sir <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Carteret, to give him an account of the backwardness of the ships we have hired to Portugall: at which he is much troubled. Thence to the Chappell, and there, though crowded, heard a very honest sermon before the King by a Canon of Christ Church, upon these words, “Having a form of godliness, but denying,” <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> Among other things, did much insist upon the sin of adultery: which methought might touch the King, and the more because he forced it into his sermon, methinks, besides his text. So up and saw the King at dinner; and thence with Sir <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Carteret to his lodgings to dinner, with him and his lady, where I saluted her, and was well received as a stranger by her; she seems a good lady, and all their discourse, which was very much, was upon their sufferings and services for the King. Yet not without some trouble, to see that some that had been much bound to them, do now neglect them; and others again most civil that have received least from them: and I do believe that he hath been a good servant to the King. Thence to walk in the Park, where the King and Duke did walk round the Park. After I was tired I went and took boat to Milford stairs, and so to Graye’s Inn walks, the first time I have been there this year, and it is very pleasant and full of good company. When tired I walked to the Wardrobe, and there staid a little with my Lady, and so by water from Paul’s Wharf (where my boat staid for me), home and supped with my wife with Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen, and so home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-4-7">7th</time>. By water to Whitehall and thence to Westminster, and staid at the Parliament-door long to speak with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry, which vexed me. Thence to the Lords’ House, and stood within the House, while the Bishops and Lords did stay till the Chancellor’s coming, and then we were put out, and they to prayers. There comes a Bishop; and while he was rigging himself, he bid his man listen at the door, whereabout in the prayers they were but the man told him something, but could not tell whereabouts it was in the prayers, nor the Bishop neither, but laughed at the conceit; so went in: but, God forgive me! I did tell it by and by to people, and did say that the man said that they were about something of saving their souls, but could not tell whereabouts in the prayers that was. I sent in a note to my Lord Privy Seal, and he came out to me; and I desired he would make another deputy for me, because of my great business of the Navy this month; but he told me he could not do it without the King’s consent, which vexed me. So to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Castle’s, and there did get a promise from his clerk that his master should officiate for me tomorrow. Thence by water to Tom’s, and there with my wife took coach and to the old Exchange, where having bought six large Holland bands, I sent her home, and myself found out my uncle Wight and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rawlinson, and with them went to the tatter’s house to dinner, and there had a good dinner of cold meat and good wine, but was troubled in my head after the little wine I drank, and so home to my office, and there did promise to drink no more wine but one glass a meal till Whitsuntide next upon any score. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bowyer and her daughters being at my house I forbore to go to them, having business and my head disturbed, but staid at my office till night, and then to walk upon the leads with my wife, and so to my chamber and thence to bed. The great talk is, that the Spaniards and the Hollanders do intend to set upon the Portuguese by sea, at Lisbon, as soon as our fleet is come away; and by that means our fleet is not likely to come yet these two months or three; which I hope is not true.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-4-8">8th</time>. Up very early and to my office, and there continued till noon. So to dinner, and in comes uncle Fenner and the two Joyces. I sent for a barrel of oysters and a breast of veal roasted, and were very merry; but I cannot down with their dull company and impertinent. After dinner to the office again. So at night by coach to Whitehall, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry not being there I brought my business of the office to him, it being almost dark, and so came away and took up my wife. By the way home and on Ludgate Hill there being a stop I bought two cakes, and they were our supper at home.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-4-9">9th</time>. Sir George Carteret, Sir Williams both and myself all the morning at the office passing the Victualler’s accounts, and at noon to dinner at the Dolphin, where a good chine of beef and other good cheer. At dinner Sir George showed me an account in French of the great famine, which is to the greatest extremity in some part of France at this day, which is very strange.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-668" id="noteref-668" epub:type="noteref">668</a> So to the Exchange, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Turner (who I found sick in bed), and several other places about business, and so home. Supper and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-4-10">10th</time>. To Westminster with the two Sir Williams by water, and did several businesses, and so to the Wardrobe with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore to dinner. Yesterday came <abbr>Col.</abbr> Talbot with letters from Portugall, that the Queen is resolved to embarque for England this week. Thence to the office all the afternoon. My Lord Windsor came to us to discourse of his affairs, and to take his leave of us; he being to go Governor of Jamaica with this fleet that is now going. Late at the office. Home with my mind full of business. So to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-4-11">11th</time>. Up early to my lute and a song, then about six o’clock with Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen by water to Deptford; and among the ships now going to Portugall with men and horse, to see them dispatched. So to Greenwich; and had a fine pleasant walk to Woolwich, having in our company <abbr>Captn.</abbr> Minnes, with whom I was much pleased to hear him talk in fine language, but pretty well for all that. Among other things, he and the other Captains that were with us tell me that negros drowned look white and lose their blackness, which I never heard before. At Woolwich, up and down to do the same business; and so back to Greenwich by water, and there while something is dressing for our dinner, Sir William and I walked into the Park, where the King hath planted trees and made steps in the hill up to the Castle, which is very magnificent. So up and down the house, which is now repayring in the Queen’s lodgings. So to dinner at the Globe, and Captain Lambert of the Duke’s pleasure boat came to us and dined with us, and were merry, and so home, and I in the evening to the Exchange, and spoke with uncle Wight, and so home and walked with my wife on the leads late, and so the barber came to me, and so to bed very weary, which I seldom am.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-4-12">12th</time>. At the office all the morning, where, among other things, being provoked by some impertinence of Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten’s, I called him unreasonable man, at which he was very angry and so was I, but I think we shall not much fall out about it. After dinner to several places about business, and so home and wrote letters at my office, and one to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry about business, and at the close did excuse my not waiting on him myself so often as others do for want of leisure. So home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-4-13">13th (Lord’s day)</time>. In the morning to Paul’s, where I heard a pretty good sermon, and thence to dinner with my Lady at the Wardrobe; and after much talk with her after dinner, I went to the Temple to Church, and there heard another: by the same token a boy, being asleep, fell down a high seat to the ground, ready to break his neck, but got no hurt. Thence to Graye’s Inn walkes; and there met <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pickering and walked with him two hours till 8 o’clock till I was quite weary. His discourse most about the pride of the Duchess of York; and how all the ladies envy my Lady Castlemaine. He intends to go to Portsmouth to meet the Queen this week; which is now the discourse and expectation of the town. So home, and no sooner come but Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Warren comes to me to bring me a paper of Field’s (with whom we have lately had a great deal of trouble at the office), being a bitter petition to the King against our office for not doing justice upon his complaint to us of embezzlement of the King’s stores by one Turpin. I took Sir William to Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen’s (who was newly come from Walthamstow), and there we read it and discoursed, but we do not much fear it, the King referring it to the Duke of York. So we drank a glass or two of wine, and so home and I to bed, my wife being in bed already.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-4-14">14th</time>. Being weary last night I lay very long in bed today, talking with my wife, and persuaded her to go to Brampton, and take Sarah with her, next week, to cure her ague by change of ayre, and we agreed all things therein. We rose, and at noon dined, and then we to the Paynter’s, and there sat the last time for my little picture, which I hope will please me. Then to Paternoster Row to buy things for my wife against her going. So home and walked upon the leads with my wife, and whether she suspected anything or no I know not, but she is quite off of her going to Brampton, which something troubles me, and yet all my design was that I might the freer go to Portsmouth when the rest go to pay off the yards there, which will be very shortly. But I will get off if I can. So to supper and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-4-15">15th</time>. At the office all the morning. Dined at home. Again at the office in the afternoon to despatch letters and so home, and with my wife, by coach, to the New Exchange, to buy her some things; where we saw some new-fashion pettycoats of sarcenett, with a black broad lace printed round the bottom and before, very handsome, and my wife had a mind to one of them, but we did not then buy one. But thence to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bowyer’s, thinking to have spoke to them for our Sarah to go to Huntsmore for a while to get away her ague, but we had not opportunity to do it, and so home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-4-16">16th</time>. Up early and took my physique; it wrought all the morning well. At noon dined, and all the afternoon, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hater to that end coming to me, he and I did go about my abstracting all the contracts made in the office since we came into it. So at night to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-4-17">17th</time>. To <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Holliard’s in the morning, thinking to be let blood, but he was gone out. So to White Hall, thinking to have had a Seal at Privy Seal, but my Lord did not come, and so I walked back home and staid within all the afternoon, there being no office kept today, but in the evening Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten sent for me to tell me that he had this day spoke to the Duke about raising our houses, and he hath given us leave to do it, at which, being glad, I went home merry, and after supper to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-4-18">18th</time>. This morning sending the boy down into the cellar for some beer I followed him with a cane, and did there beat him for his staying of awards and other faults, and his sister came to me down and begged for him. So I forebore, and afterwards, in my wife’s chamber, did there talk to Jane how much I did love the boy for her sake, and how much it do concern to correct the boy for his faults, or else he would be undone. So at last she was well pleased. This morning Sir <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Carteret, Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten and I met at the office, and did conclude of our going to Portsmouth next week, in which my mind is at a great loss what to do with my wife, for I cannot persuade her to go to Brampton, and I am loth to leave her at, home. All the afternoon in several places to put things in order for my going. At night home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-4-19">19th</time>. This morning, before we sat, I went to Aldgate; and at the corner shop, a draper’s, I stood, and did see Barkestead, Okey, and Corbet, drawn towards the gallows at Tiburne; and there they were hanged and quartered. They all looked very cheerful; but I hear they all die defending what they did to the King to be just; which is very strange. So to the office and then home to dinner, and Captain David Lambert came to take his leave of me, he being to go back to Tangier there to lie. Then abroad about business, and in the evening did get a bever, an old one, but a very good one, of Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten, for which I must give him something; but I am very well pleased with it. So after writing by the post to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-4-20">20th (Lord’s day)</time>. My intention being to go this morning to White Hall to hear South, my Lord Chancellor’s chaplain, the famous preacher and oratour of Oxford, (who the last Lord’s day did sink down in the pulpit before the King, and could not proceed,) it did rain, and the wind against me, that I could by no means get a boat or coach to carry me; and so I staid at Paul’s, where the judges did all meet, and heard a sermon, it being the first Sunday of the term; but they had a very poor sermon. So to my Lady’s and dined, and so to White Hall to Sir <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Carteret, and so to the Chappell, where I challenged my pew as Clerk of the Privy Seal and had it, and then walked home with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blagrave to his old house in the Fishyard, and there he had a pretty kinswoman that sings, and we did sing some holy things, and afterwards others came in and so I left them, and by water through the bridge (which did trouble me) home, and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-4-21">21st: This morning I attempted to persuade my wife in bed to go to Brampton this week, but she would not, which troubles me, and seeing that I could keep it no longer from her, I told her that I was resolved to go to Portsmouth tomorrow</time>. Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten goes to Chatham today, and will be back again to come for Portsmouth after us on Thursday next. I went to Westminster and several places about business. Then at noon dined with my Lord Crew; and after dinner went up to Sir <abbr class="name">Thos.</abbr> Crew’s chamber, who is still ill. He tells me how my Lady Duchess of Richmond and Castlemaine had a falling out the other day; and she calls the latter Jane Shore, and did hope to see her come to the same end that she did. Coming down again to my Lord, he told me that news was come that the Queen is landed; at which I took leave, and by coach hurried to White Hall, the bells ringing in several places; but I found there no such matter, nor anything like it. So I went by appointment to Anthony Joyce’s, where I sat with his wife and <abbr class="name">Matt.</abbr> Joyce an hour or two, and so her husband not being at home, away I went and in Cheapside spied him and took him into the coach. Home, and there I found my Lady Jemimah, and Anne, and Madamoiselle come to see my wife, whom I left, and to talk with Joyce about a project I have of his and my joyning, to get some money for my brother Tom and his kinswoman to help forward with her portion if they should marry. I mean in buying of tallow of him at a low rate for the King, and Tom should have the profit; but he tells me the profit will be considerable, at which I was troubled, but I have agreed with him to serve some in my absence. He went away, and then came <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore and sat late with me talking about business, and so went away and I to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-4-22">22nd</time>. After taking leave of my wife, which we could hardly do kindly, because of her mind to go along with me, Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen and I took coach and so over the bridge to Lambeth, <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Bodham and Tom Hewet going as clerks to Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen, and my Will for me. Here we got a dish of buttered eggs, and there staid till Sir <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Carteret came to us from White Hall, who brought <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Clerke with him, at which I was very glad, and so we set out, and I was very much pleased with his company, and were very merry all the way. … We came to Gilford and there passed our time in the garden, cutting of sparagus for supper, the best that ever I eat in my life but in the house last year. Supped well, and the Doctor and I to bed together, calling cozens from his name and my office.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-4-23">23nd</time>. Up early, and to Petersfield, and there dined well; and thence got a countryman to guide us by Havant, to avoid going through the Forest; but he carried us much out of the way, and upon our coming we sent away an express to Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten to stop his coming, which I did project to make good my oath, that my wife should come if any of our wives came, which my Lady Batten did intend to do with her husband. The Doctor and I lay together at Wiard’s, the chyrurgeon’s, in Portsmouth, his wife a very pretty woman. We lay very well and merrily; in the morning, concluding him to be of the eldest blood and house of the Clerkes, because that all the fleas came to him and not to me.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-4-24">24th</time>. Up and to Sir <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Carteret’s lodgings at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Stephens’s, where we keep our table all the time we are here. Thence all of us to the Pay-house; but the books not being ready, we went to church to the lecture, where there was my Lord Ormond and Manchester, and much London company, though not so much as I expected. Here we had a very good sermon upon this text: “In love serving one another;” which pleased me very well. No news of the Queen at all. So to dinner; and then to the Pay all the afternoon. Then <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen and I walked to the King’s Yard, and there lay at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Tippets’s, where exceeding well treated.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-4-25">25th</time>. All the morning at Portsmouth, at the Pay, and then to dinner, and again to the Pay; and at night got the Doctor to go lie with me, and much pleased with his company; but I was much troubled in my eyes, by reason of the healths I have this day been forced to drink.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-4-26">26th</time>. Sir George and I, and his clerk <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Stephens, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Holt our guide, over to Gosport; and so rode to Southampton. In our way, besides my Lord Southampton’s parks and lands, which in one view we could see £6,000 per annum, we observed a little churchyard, where the graves are accustomed to be all sowed with sage.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-669" id="noteref-669" epub:type="noteref">669</a> At Southampton we went to the Mayor’s and there dined, and had sturgeon of their own catching the last week, which do not happen in twenty years, and it was well ordered. They brought us also some caveare, which I attempted to order, but all to no purpose, for they had neither given it salt enough, nor are the seedes of the roe broke, but are all in berryes. The towne is one most gallant street, and is walled round with stone, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, and Bevis’s picture upon one of the gates; many old walls of religious houses, and the key, well worth seeing. After dinner to horse again, being in nothing troubled but the badness of my hat, which I borrowed to save my beaver. Home by night and wrote letters to London, and so with Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen to the Dock to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-4-27">27th (Sunday)</time>. Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen got trimmed before me, and so took the coach to Portsmouth to wait on my Lord Steward to church, and sent the coach for me back again. So I rode to church, and met my Lord Chamberlain upon the walls of the garrison, who owned and spoke to me. I followed him in the crowd of gallants through the Queen’s lodgings to chappell; the rooms being all rarely furnished, and escaped hardly being set on fire yesterday. At chappell we had a most excellent and eloquent sermon. And here I spoke and saluted <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Pierce, but being in haste could not learn of her where her lodgings are, which vexes me. Thence took Ned Pickering to dinner with us, and the two Marshes, father and Son, dined with us, and very merry. After dinner Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten and I, the Doctor, and Ned Pickering by coach to the Yard, and there on board the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Swallow</i> in the dock hear our navy chaplain preach a sad sermon, full of nonsense and false Latin; but prayed for the Right Honourable the principal officers.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-670" id="noteref-670" epub:type="noteref">670</a> After sermon took him to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Tippets’s to drink a glass of wine, and so at 4 back again by coach to Portsmouth, and then visited the Mayor, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Timbrell, our anchor-smith, who showed us the present they have for the Queen; which is a salt-sellar of silver, the walls christall, with four eagles and four greyhounds standing up at the top to bear up a dish; which indeed is one of the neatest pieces of plate that ever I saw, and the case is very pretty also.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-671" id="noteref-671" epub:type="noteref">671</a> This evening came a merchantman in the harbour, which we hired at London to carry horses to Portugall; but, Lord! what running there was to the seaside to hear what news, thinking it had come from the Queen. In the evening Sir George, Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen and I walked round the walls, and thence we two with the Doctor to the yard, and so to supper and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-4-28">28th</time>. The Doctor and I begun philosophy discourse exceeding pleasant. He offers to bring me into the college of virtuosoes<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-672" id="noteref-672" epub:type="noteref">672</a> and my Lord Brouncker’s acquaintance, and to show me some anatomy, which makes me very glad; and I shall endeavour it when I come to London. Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen much troubled upon letters came last night. Showed me one of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Owen’s<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-673" id="noteref-673" epub:type="noteref">673</a> to his son<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-674" id="noteref-674" epub:type="noteref">674</a> whereby it appears his son is much perverted in his opinion by him; which I now perceive is one thing that hath put Sir William so long off the hooks. By coach to the Pay-house, and so to work again, and then to dinner, and to it again, and so in the evening to the yard, and supper and bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-4-29">29th</time>. At the pay all the morning, and so to dinner; and then to it again in the afternoon, and after our work was done, Sir <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Carteret, Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen and I walked forth, and I spied <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Pierce and another lady passing by. So I left them and went to the ladies, and walked with them up and down, and took them to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Stephens, and there gave them wine and sweetmeats, and were very merry; and then comes the Doctor, and we carried them by coach to their lodging, which was very poor, but the best they could get, and such as made much mirth among us. So I appointed one to watch when the gates of the town were ready to be shut, and to give us notice; and so the Doctor and I staid with them playing and laughing, and at last were forced to bid good night for fear of being locked into the town all night. So we walked to the yard, designing how to prevent our going to London tomorrow, that we might be merry with these ladies, which I did. So to supper and merrily to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-4-30">30th</time>. This morning Sir <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Carteret came down to the yard, and there we mustered over all the men and determined of some regulations in the yard, and then to dinner, all the officers of the yard with us, and after dinner walk to Portsmouth, there to pay off the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Success</i>, which we did pretty early, and so I took leave of Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen, he desiring to know whither I went, but I would not tell him. I went to the ladies, and there took them and walked to the Mayor’s to show them the present, and then to the Dock, where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Tippets made much of them, and thence back again, the Doctor being come to us to their lodgings, whither came our supper by my appointment, and we very merry, playing at cards and laughing very merry till 12 o’clock at night, and so having staid so long (which we had resolved to stay till they bade us be gone), which yet they did not do but by consent, we bade them good night, and so past the guards, and went to the Doctor’s lodgings, and there lay with him, our discourse being much about the quality of the lady with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Pierce, she being somewhat old and handsome, and painted and fine, and had a very handsome maid with her, which we take to be the marks of a bawd. But <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Pierce says she is a stranger to her and met by chance in the coach, and pretends to be a dresser. Her name is Eastwood. So to sleep in a bad bed about one o’clock in the morning. This afternoon after dinner comes <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Stephenson, one of the burgesses of the town, to tell me that the Mayor and burgesses did desire my acceptance of a burgess-ship, and were ready at the Mayor’s to make me one. So I went, and there they were all ready, and did with much civility give me my oath, and after the oath, did by custom shake me all by the hand. So I took them to a tavern and made them drink, and paying the reckoning, went away. They having first in the tavern made <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waith also a burgess, he coming in while we were drinking. It cost me a piece in gold to the Town Clerk, and 10<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> to the Bayliffes, and spent 6<abbr class="currency eoc">s.</abbr></p>
			</article>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
