<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>September 1660</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-9" epub:type="chapter z3998:diary">
			<h2 epub:type="title">September 1660</h2>
			<article id="entry-1660-9-11" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-09-11">September 1st</time>. This morning I took care to get a vessel to carry my Lord’s things to the Downs on Monday next, and so to White Hall to my Lord, where he and I did look over the Commission drawn for him by the Duke’s Council, which I do not find my Lord displeased with, though short of what <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Walker did formerly draw for him. Thence to the Privy Seal to see how things went there, and I find that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Baron had by a severe warrant from the King got possession of the office from his brother Bickerstaffe, which is very strange, and much to our admiration, it being against all open justice. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore and I and several others being invited today by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Goodman, a friend of his, we dined at the Bullhead upon the best venison pasty that ever I eat of in my life, and with one dish more, it was the best dinner I ever was at. Here rose in discourse at table a dispute between <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Clerke, the former affirming that it was essential to a tragedy to have the argument of it true, which the Doctor denied, and left it to me to be judge, and the cause to be determined next Tuesday morning at the same place, upon the eating of the remains of the pasty, and the loser to spend 10<abbr>s.</abbr> All this afternoon sending express to the fleet, to order things against my Lord’s coming and taking direction of my Lord about some rich furniture to take along with him for the Princess.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-671" id="noteref-671" epub:type="noteref">671</a> And talking of this, I hear by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Townsend, that there is the greatest preparation against the Prince de Ligne’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-672" id="noteref-672" epub:type="noteref">672</a> coming over from the King of Spain, that ever was in England for their Embassador. Late home, and what with business and my boy’s roguery my mind being unquiet, I went to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-9-12" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-09-12">2nd (Sunday)</time>. To Westminster, my Lord being gone before my coming to chapel. I and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply told out my money, and made even for my Privy Seal fees and gratuity money, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, to this day between my Lord and me. After that to chappell, where <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Fern,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-673" id="noteref-673" epub:type="noteref">673</a> a good honest sermon upon “The Lord is my shield.” After sermon a dull anthem, and so to my Lord’s (he dining abroad) and dined with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply. So, to <abbr>St.</abbr> Margarett’s, and heard a good sermon upon the text “Teach us the old way,” or something like it, wherein he ran over all the new tenets in policy and religion, which have brought us into all our late divisions. From church to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Crisp’s (having sent <abbr class="name">Wm.</abbr> Hewer home to tell my wife that I could not come home tonight because of my Lord’s going out early tomorrow morning), where I sat late, and did give them a great deal of wine, it being a farewell cup to Laud Crisp. I drank till the daughter began to be very loving to me and kind, and I fear is not so good as she should be. To my Lord’s, and to bed with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-9-13" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-09-13">3rd</time>. Up and to <abbr>Mr.</abbr>⁠⸻, the goldsmith near the new Exchange, where I bought my wedding ring, and there, with much ado, got him to put a gold ring to the jewell, which the King of Sweden<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-674" id="noteref-674" epub:type="noteref">674</a> did give my Lord: out of which my Lord had now taken the King’s picture, and intends to make a George of it. This morning at my Lord’s I had an opportunity to speak with Sir George Downing, who has promised me to give me up my bond, and to pay me for my last quarter while I was at sea, that so I may pay <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore and Hawly. About noon my Lord, having taken leave of the King in the Shield Gallery (where I saw with what kindness the King did hug my Lord at his parting), I went over with him and saw him in his coach at Lambeth, and there took leave of him, he going to the Downs, which put me in mind of his first voyage that ever he made, which he did begin like this from Lambeth. In the afternoon with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore to my house to cast up our Privy Seal accounts, where I found that my Lord’s comes to 400 and odd pounds, and mine to £132, out of which I do give him as good as £25 for his pains, with which I doubt he is not satisfied, but my heart is full glad. Thence with him to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s, and did fetch as much money as did make even our accounts between him and me. Home, and there found <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cooke come back from my Lord for me to get him some things bought for him to be brought after them, a toilet cap and comb case of silk, to make use of in Holland, for he goes to the Hague, which I can do tomorrow morning. This day my father and my uncle Fenner, and both his sons, have been at my house to see it, and my wife did treat them nobly with wine and anchovies. By reason of my Lord’s going today I could not get the office to meet today.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-9-14" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-09-14">4th</time>. I did many things this morning at home before I went out, as looking over the joiners, who are flooring my diningroom, and doing business with Sir Williams<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-675" id="noteref-675" epub:type="noteref">675</a> both at the office, and so to Whitehall, and so to the Bullhead, where we had the remains of our pasty, where I did give my verdict against <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore upon last Saturday’s wager, where <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Fuller coming in do confirm me in my verdict. From thence to my Lord’s and despatched <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cooke away with the things to my Lord. From thence to Axe Yard to my house, where standing at the door <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Diana comes by, whom I took into my house upstairs, and there did dally with her a great while, and found that in Latin “<i xml:lang="la">Nulla puella negat.</i>” So home by water, and there sat up late setting my papers in order, and my money also, and teaching my wife her music lesson, in which I take great pleasure. So to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-9-15" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-09-15">5th</time>. To the office. From thence by coach upon the desire of the principal officers to a Master of Chancery to give <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Stowell his oath, whereby he do answer that he did hear Phineas Pett say very high words against the King a great while ago. Coming back our coach broke, and so Stowell and I to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rawlinson’s, and after a glass of wine parted, and I to the office, home to dinner, where (having put away my boy in the morning) his father brought him again, but I did so clear up my boy’s roguery to his father, that he could not speak against my putting him away, and so I did give him 10<abbr>s.</abbr> for the boy’s clothes that I made him, and so parted and tore his indenture. All the afternoon with the principal officers at Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten’s about Pett’s business (where I first saw <abbr>Col.</abbr> Slingsby,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-676" id="noteref-676" epub:type="noteref">676</a> who has now his appointment for Comptroller), but did bring it to no issue. This day I saw our Dedimus to be sworn in the peace by, which will be shortly. In the evening my wife being a little impatient I went along with her to buy her a necklace of pearl, which will cost £4 10<abbr>s.</abbr>, which I am willing to comply with her in for her encouragement, and because I have lately got money, having now above £200 in cash beforehand in the world. Home, and having in our way bought a rabbit and two little lobsters, my wife and I did sup late, and so to bed. Great news now-a-day of the Duke d’Anjou’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-677" id="noteref-677" epub:type="noteref">677</a> desire to marry the Princesse Henrietta. Hugh Peters is said to be taken,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-678" id="noteref-678" epub:type="noteref">678</a> and the Duke of Gloucester is ill, and it is said it will prove the smallpox.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-9-16" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-09-16">6th</time>. To Whitehall by water with Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten, and in our passage told me how Commissioner Pett did pay himself for the entertainment that he did give the King at Chatham at his coming in, and 20<abbr>s.</abbr> a day all the time he was in Holland, which I wonder at, and so I see there is a great deal of envy between the two. At Whitehall I met with Commissioner Pett, who told me how <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry and Fairbank his solicitor are falling out, one complaining of the other for taking too great fees, which is too true. I find that Commissioner Pett is under great discontent, and is loth to give too much money for his place, and so do greatly desire me to go along with him in what we shall agree to give <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry, which I have promised him, but am unwilling to mix my fortune with him that is going down the wind. We all met this morning and afterwards at the Admiralty, where our business is to ask provision of victuals ready for the ships in the Downs, which we did, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gauden promising to go himself thither and see it done. Dined Will and I at my Lord’s upon a joint of meat that I sent <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Sarah for. Afterwards to my office and sent all my books to my Lord’s, in order to send them to my house that I now dwell in. Home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-9-17" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-09-17">7th</time>. Not office day, and in the afternoon at home all the day, it being the first that I have been at home all day since I came hither. Putting my papers, books and other things in order, and writing of letters. This day my Lord set sail from the Downs for Holland.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-9-18" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-09-18">8th</time>. All day also at home. At night sent for by Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen, with whom I sat late drinking a glass of wine and discoursing, and I find him to be a very sociable man, and an able man, and very cunning.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-9-19" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-09-19">9th (Sunday)</time>. In the morning with Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen to church, and a very good sermon of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mills. Home to dinner, and Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen with me to such as I had, and it was very handsome, it being the first time that he ever saw my wife or house since we came hither. Afternoon to church with my wife, and after that home, and there walked with Major Hart,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-679" id="noteref-679" epub:type="noteref">679</a> who came to see me, in the garden, who tells me that we are all like to be speedily disbanded,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-680" id="noteref-680" epub:type="noteref">680</a> and then I lose the benefit of a muster. After supper to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-9-20" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-09-20">10th (Office day)</time>. News of the Duke’s intention to go tomorrow to the fleet for a day or two to meet his sister. <abbr>Col.</abbr> Slingsby and I to Whitehall, thinking to proffer our service to the Duke to wait upon him, but meeting with Sir <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Carteret he sent us in all haste back again to hire two Catches for the present use of the Duke. So we returned and landed at the Bear at the Bridge foot,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-681" id="noteref-681" epub:type="noteref">681</a> where we saw Southwark Fair<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-682" id="noteref-682" epub:type="noteref">682</a> (I having not at all seen Bartholomew Fair), and so to the Tower wharf, where we did hire two catches. So to the office and found Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten at dinner with some friends upon a good chine of beef, on which I ate heartily, I being very hungry. Home, where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Snow (whom afterwards we called one another cousin) came to me to see me, and with him and one Shelston, a simple fellow that looks after an employment (that was with me just upon my going to sea last), to a tavern, where till late with them. So home, having drunk too much, and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-9-21" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-09-21">11th</time>. At Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten’s with Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen we drank our morning draft, and from thence for an hour in the office and dispatch a little business. Dined at Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten’s, and by this time I see that we are like to have a very good correspondence and neighbourhood, but chargeable. All the afternoon at home looking over my carpenters. At night I called <abbr class="name">Thos.</abbr> Hater out of the office to my house to sit and talk with me. After he was gone I caused the girl to wash the wainscot of our parlour, which she did very well, which caused my wife and I good sport. Up to my chamber to read a little, and wrote my Diary for three or four days past. The Duke of York did go today by break of day to the Downs. The Duke of Gloucester ill. The House of Parliament was to adjourn today. I know not yet whether it be done or no. To bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-9-22" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-09-22">12th (Office day)</time>. This noon I expected to have had my cousin Snow and my father come to dine with me, but it being very rainy they did not come. My brother Tom came to my house with a letter from my brother John, wherein he desires some books: <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>Barthol. Anatom.</abbr></i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>Rosin. Rom. Antiq.</abbr></i>, and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>Gassend. Astronom.</abbr></i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-683" id="noteref-683" epub:type="noteref">683</a> the last of which I did give him, and an angel<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-684" id="noteref-684" epub:type="noteref">684</a> against my father buying of the others. At home all the afternoon looking after my workmen, whose laziness do much trouble me. This day the Parliament adjourned.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-9-23" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-09-23">13th</time>. Old East comes to me in the morning with letters, and I did give him a bottle of Northdown ale, which made the poor man almost drunk. In the afternoon my wife went to the burial of a child of my cousin Scott’s, and it is observable that within this month my Aunt Wight was brought to bed of two girls, my cousin Stradwick<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-685" id="noteref-685" epub:type="noteref">685</a> of a girl and a boy, and my cousin Scott of a boy, and all died. In the afternoon to Westminster, where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dalton was ready with his money to pay me for my house, but our writings not being drawn it could not be done today. I met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hawly, who was removing his things from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bowyer’s, where he has lodged a great while, and I took him and <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Bowyer to the Swan and drank, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hawly did give me a little black rattoon<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-686" id="noteref-686" epub:type="noteref">686</a> painted and gilt. Home by water. This day the Duke of Gloucester died of the smallpox, by the great negligence of the doctors.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-687" id="noteref-687" epub:type="noteref">687</a></p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-9-24" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-09-24">14th (Office day)</time>. I got £42 15<abbr>s.</abbr> appointed me by bill for my employment of Secretary to the 4th of this month, it being the last money I shall receive upon that score. My wife went this afternoon to see my mother, who I hear is very ill, at which my heart is very sad. In the afternoon Luellin comes to my house, and takes me out to the Mitre in Wood Street,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-688" id="noteref-688" epub:type="noteref">688</a> where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Samford, <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Symons and his wife, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Scobell, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mount and Chetwind, where they were very merry, Luellin being drunk, and I being to defend the ladies from his kissing them, I kissed them myself very often with a great deal of mirth. Parted very late, they by coach to Westminster, and I on foot.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-9-25" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-09-25">15th</time>. Met very early at our office this morning to pick out the twenty-five ships which are to be first paid off. After that to Westminster and dined with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dalton at his office, where we had one great court dish, but our papers not being done we could [not] make an end of our business till Monday next. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dalton and I over the water to our landlord Vanly, with whom we agree as to Dalton becoming a tenant. Back to Westminster, where I met with <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Castles, who chidd me for some errors in our Privy-Seal business; among the rest, for letting the fees of the six judges pass unpaid, which I know not what to say to, till I speak to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore. I was much troubled, for fear of being forced to pay the money myself. Called at my father’s going home, and bespoke mourning for myself, for the death of the Duke of Gloucester. I found my mother pretty well. So home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-9-26" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-09-26">16th (Sunday)</time>. To <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Hardy’s church,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-689" id="noteref-689" epub:type="noteref">689</a> and sat with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rawlinson and heard a good sermon upon the occasion of the Duke’s death. His text was, “And is there any evil in the city and the Lord hath not done it?” Home to dinner, having some sport with <abbr class="name">Wm.</abbr> [Hewer], who never had been at Common Prayer before. After dinner I alone to Westminster, where I spent my time walking up and down in Westminster Abbey till sermon time with <abbr class="name">Ben.</abbr> Palmer and Fetters the watchmaker, who told me that my Lord of Oxford<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-690" id="noteref-690" epub:type="noteref">690</a> is also dead of the smallpox; in whom his family dies, after 600 years having that honour in their family and name. From thence to the Park, where I saw how far they had proceeded in the Pell-mell, and in making a river through the Park, which I had never seen before since it was begun.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-691" id="noteref-691" epub:type="noteref">691</a> Thence to White Hall garden, where I saw the King in purple mourning for his brother.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-692" id="noteref-692" epub:type="noteref">692</a> So home, and in my way met with Dinah, who spoke to me and told me she had a desire to speak too about some business when I came to Westminster again. Which she spoke in such a manner that I was afraid she might tell me something that I would not hear of our last meeting at my house at Westminster. Home late, being very dark. A gentleman in the Poultry had a great and dirty fall over a waterpipe that lay along the channel.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-9-27" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-09-27">17th</time>. Office very early about casting up the debts of those twenty-five ships which are to be paid off, which we are to present to the Committee of Parliament. I did give my wife £15 this morning to go to buy mourning things for her and me, which she did. Dined at home and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore with me, and afterwards to Whitehall to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dalton and drank in the Cellar, where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vanly according to appointment was. Thence forth to see the Prince de Ligne, Spanish Embassador, come in to his audience, which was done in very great state. That being done, Dalton, Vanly, Scrivener and some friends of theirs and I to the Axe, and signed and sealed our writings, and hence to the Wine cellar again, where I received £41 for my interest in my house, out of which I paid my Landlord to Michaelmas next, and so all is even between him and me, and I freed of my poor little house. Home by link with my money under my arm. So to bed after I had looked over the things my wife had bought today, with which being not very well pleased, they costing too much, I went to bed in a discontent. Nothing yet from sea, where my Lord and the Princess are.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-9-28" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-09-28">18th</time>. At home all the morning looking over my workmen in my house. After dinner Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten, Pen, and myself by coach to Westminster Hall, where we met <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wayte the lawyer to the Treasurer, and so we went up to the Committee of Parliament, which are to consider of the debts of the Army and Navy, and did give in our account of the twenty-five ships. <abbr>Col.</abbr> Birch was very impertinent and troublesome. But at last we did agree to fit the accounts of our ships more perfectly for their view within a few days, that they might see what a trouble it is to do what they desire. From thence Sir Williams both going by water home, I took <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wayte to the Rhenish winehouse, and drank with him and so parted. Thence to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s and spoke with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore about the business of paying off Baron our share of the dividend. So on foot home, by the way buying a hat band and other things for my mourning tomorrow. So home and to bed. This day I heard that the Duke of York, upon the news of the death of his brother yesterday, came hither by post last night.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-9-29" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-09-29">19th (Office day)</time>. I put on my mourning and went to the office. At noon thinking to have found my wife in hers, I found that the tailor had failed her, at which I was vexed because of an invitation that we have to a dinner this day, but after having waited till past one o’clock I went, and left her to put on some other clothes and come after me to the Mitre tavern in Wood-street (a house of the greatest note in London), where I met <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Symons, and <abbr class="name">D.</abbr> Scobell, and their wives, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Samford, Luellin, Chetwind, one <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vivion, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> White,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-693" id="noteref-693" epub:type="noteref">693</a> formerly chaplin to the Lady Protectresse<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-694" id="noteref-694" epub:type="noteref">694</a> (and still so, and one they say that is likely to get my Lady Francess for his wife). Here we were very merry and had a very good dinner, my wife coming after me hither to us. Among other pleasures some of us fell to handycapp,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-695" id="noteref-695" epub:type="noteref">695</a> a sport that I never knew before, which was very good. We stayed till it was very late; it rained sadly, but we made shift to get coaches. So home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-9-30" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-09-30">20th</time>. At home, and at the office, and in the garden walking with both Sir Williams all the morning. After dinner to Whitehall to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dalton, and with him to my house and took away all my papers that were left in my closet, and so I have now nothing more in the house or to do with it. We called to speak with my Landlord Beale, but he was not within but spoke with the old woman, who takes it very ill that I did not let her have it, but I did give her an answer. From thence to Sir <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Downing and stayed late there (he having sent for me to come to him), which was to tell me how my Lord Sandwich had disappointed him of a ship to bring over his child and goods, and made great complaint thereof; but I got him to write a letter to Lawson,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-696" id="noteref-696" epub:type="noteref">696</a> which it may be may do the business for him, I writing another also about it. While he was writing, and his Lady and I had a great deal of discourse in praise of Holland. By water to the Bridge, and so to Major Hart’s lodgings in Cannon-street, who used me very kindly with wine and good discourse, particularly upon the ill method which Colonel Birch and the Committee use in defending of the army and the navy; promising the Parliament to save them a great deal of money, when we judge that it will cost the King more than if they had nothing to do with it, by reason of their delays and scrupulous enquirys into the account of both. So home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-10-1" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-10-01">21st (Office day)</time>. There all the morning and afternoon till 4 o’clock. Hence to Whitehall, thinking to have put up my books at my Lord’s, but am disappointed from want of a chest which I had at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bowyer’s. Back by water about 8 o’clock, and upon the water saw the corpse of the Duke of Gloucester brought down Somerset House stairs, to go by water to Westminster, to be buried tonight. I landed at the old Swan<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-697" id="noteref-697" epub:type="noteref">697</a> and went to the Hoop Tavern, and (by a former agreement) sent for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Chaplin, who with Nicholas Osborne and one Daniel came to us and we drank off two or three quarts of wine, which was very good; the drawing of our wine causing a great quarrel in the house between the two drawers which should draw us the best, which caused a great deal of noise and falling out till the master parted them, and came up to us and did give us a large account of the liberty that he gives his servants, all alike, to draw what wine they will to please his customers; and we did eat above 200 walnuts. About 10 o’clock we broke up and so home, and in my way I called in with them at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Chaplin’s, where Nicholas Osborne did give me a barrel of samphire,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-698" id="noteref-698" epub:type="noteref">698</a> and showed me the keys of Mardyke Fort,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-699" id="noteref-699" epub:type="noteref">699</a> which he that was commander of the fort sent him as a token when the fort was demolished, which I was mightily pleased to see, and will get them of him if I can. Home, where I found my boy (my maid’s brother) come out of the country today, but was gone to bed and so I could not see him tonight. To bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-10-2" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-10-02">22nd</time>. This morning I called up my boy, and found him a pretty, well-looked boy, and one that I think will please me. I went this morning by land to Westminster along with Luellin, who came to my house this morning to get me to go with him to <abbr>Capt.</abbr> Allen to speak with him for his brother to go with him to Constantinople, but could not find him. We walked on to Fleet street, where at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Standing’s in Salsbury Court we drank our morning draft and had a pickled herring. Among other discourse here he told me how the pretty woman that I always loved at the beginning of Cheapside that sells child’s coats was served by the Lady Bennett (a famous strumpet), who by counterfeiting to fall into a swoon upon the sight of her in her shop, became acquainted with her, and at last got her ends of her to lie with a gentleman that had hired her to procure this poor soul for him. To Westminster to my Lord’s, and there in the house of office vomited up all my breakfast, my stomach being ill all this day by reason of the last night’s debauch. Here I sent to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bowyer’s for my chest and put up my books and sent them home. I stayed here all day in my Lord’s chamber and upon the leads gazing upon Diana, who looked out of a window upon me. At last I went out to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harper’s, and she standing over the way at the gate, I went over to her and appointed to meet tomorrow in the afternoon at my Lord’s. Here I bought a hanging jack. From thence by coach home (by the way at the New Exchange<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-700" id="noteref-700" epub:type="noteref">700</a> I bought a pair of short black stockings, to wear over a pair of silk ones for mourning; and here I met with <abbr class="name">The.</abbr> Turner and Joyce,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-701" id="noteref-701" epub:type="noteref">701</a> buying of things to go into mourning too for the Duke, which is now the mode of all the ladies in town), where I wrote some letters by the post to Hinchinbroke to let them know that this day <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">Edw.</abbr> Pickering is come from my Lord, and says that he left him well in Holland, and that he will be here within three or four days. Today not well of my last night’s drinking yet. I had the boy up tonight for his sister to teach him to put me to bed, and I heard him read, which he did pretty well.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-10-3" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-10-03">23rd (Lord’s day)</time>. My wife got up to put on her mourning today and to go to Church this morning. I up and set down my journall for these 5 days past. This morning came one from my father’s with a black cloth coat, made of my short cloak, to walk up and down in. To church my wife and I, with Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten, where we heard of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mills a very good sermon upon these words, “So run that ye may obtain.” After dinner all alone to Westminster. At Whitehall I met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierce and his wife (she newly come forth after childbirth) both in mourning for the Duke of Gloucester. She went with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Child to Whitehall chapel and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierce with me to the Abbey, where I expected to hear <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Baxter or <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rowe preach their farewell sermon, and in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Symons’s pew I sat and heard <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rowe. Before sermon I laughed at the reader, who in his prayer desires of God that He would imprint his word on the thumbs of our right hands and on the right great toes of our right feet.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-702" id="noteref-702" epub:type="noteref">702</a> In the midst of the sermon some plaster fell from the top of the Abbey, that made me and all the rest in our pew afeard, and I wished myself out. After sermon with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierce to Whitehall, and from thence to my Lord, but Diana did not come according to our agreement. So calling at my father’s (where my wife had been this afternoon but was gone home) I went home. This afternoon, the King having news of the Princess being come to Margate, he and the Duke of York went down thither in barges to her.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-10-4" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-10-04">24th (Office day)</time>. From thence to dinner by coach with my wife to my Cousin Scott’s, and the company not being come, I went over the way to the Barber’s. So thither again to dinner, where was my uncle Fenner and my aunt, my father and mother, and others. Among the rest my Cousin <abbr class="name">Rich.</abbr> Pepys,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-703" id="noteref-703" epub:type="noteref">703</a> their elder brother, whom I had not seen these fourteen years, ever since he came from New England. It was strange for us to go a gossiping to her, she having newly buried her child that she was brought to bed of. I rose from table and went to the Temple church, where I had appointed Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten to meet him; and there at Sir Heneage Finch Sollicitor General’s chambers, before him and Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Wilde,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-704" id="noteref-704" epub:type="noteref">704</a> Recorder of London (whom we sent for from his chamber) we were sworn justices of peace for Middlesex, Essex, Kent, and Southampton; with which honour I did find myself mightily pleased, though I am wholly ignorant in the duty of a justice of peace. From thence with Sir William to Whitehall by water (old <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Smith with us) intending to speak with Secretary Nicholas about the augmentation of our salaries, but being forth we went to the Three Tuns tavern, where we drank awhile, and then came in <abbr>Col.</abbr> Slingsby and another gentleman and sat with us. From thence to my Lord’s to enquire whether they have had anything from my Lord or no. Knocking at the door, there passed me <abbr>Mons.</abbr> L’Impertinent [<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Butler] for whom I took a coach and went with him to a dancing meeting in Broad Street,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-705" id="noteref-705" epub:type="noteref">705</a> at the house that was formerly the glasshouse, Luke Channel,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-706" id="noteref-706" epub:type="noteref">706</a> Master of the School, where I saw good dancing, but it growing late, and the room very full of people and so very hot, I went home.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-10-5" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-10-05">25th</time>. To the office, where Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten, Colonel Slingsby,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-707" id="noteref-707" epub:type="noteref">707</a> and I sat awhile, and Sir <abbr class="name">R.</abbr> Ford<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-708" id="noteref-708" epub:type="noteref">708</a> coming to us about some business, we talked together of the interest of this kingdom to have a peace with Spain and a war with France and Holland; where Sir <abbr class="name">R.</abbr> Ford talked like a man of great reason and experience. And afterwards I did send for a cup of tee<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-709" id="noteref-709" epub:type="noteref">709</a> (a China drink) of which I never had drank before, and went away. Then came <abbr>Col.</abbr> Birch and Sir <abbr class="name">R.</abbr> Browne by a former appointment, and with them from Tower wharf in the barge belonging to our office we went to Deptford to pay off the ship <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Success</i>, which (Sir <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Carteret and Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen coming afterwards to us) we did, <abbr>Col.</abbr> Birch being a mighty busy man and one that is the most indefatigable and forward to make himself work of any man that ever I knew in my life. At the Globe we had a very good dinner, and after that to the pay again, which being finished we returned by water again, and I from our office with <abbr>Col.</abbr> Slingsby by coach to Westminster (I setting him down at his lodgings by the way) to inquire for my Lord’s coming thither (the King and the Princess<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-710" id="noteref-710" epub:type="noteref">710</a> coming up the river this afternoon as we were at our pay), and I found him gone to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s, where I found him well, only had got some corns upon his foot which was not well yet. My Lord told me how the ship that brought the Princess and him (<i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">The Tredagh</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-711" id="noteref-711" epub:type="noteref">711</a>) did knock six times upon the Kentish Knock,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-712" id="noteref-712" epub:type="noteref">712</a> which put them in great fear for the ship; but got off well. He told me also how the King had knighted Vice-Admiral Lawson and Sir Richard Stayner. From him late and by coach home, where the plasterers being at work in all the rooms in my house, my wife was fain to make a bed upon the ground for her and me, and so there we lay all night.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-10-6" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-10-06">26th</time>. Office day. That done to the church, to consult about our gallery. So home to dinner, where I found <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hunt, who brought me a letter for me to get my Lord to sign for her husband, which I shall do for her. At home with the workmen all the afternoon, our house being in a most sad pickle. In the evening to the office, where I fell a-reading of Speed’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Geography</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-713" id="noteref-713" epub:type="noteref">713</a> for a while. So home thinking to have found Will at home, but he not being come home but gone somewhere else I was very angry, and when he came did give him a very great check for it, and so I went to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-10-7" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-10-07">27th</time>. To my Lord at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s, and there took order about some business of his, and from thence home to my workmen all the afternoon. In the evening to my Lord’s, and there did read over with him and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Walker my lord’s new commission for sea, and advised thereupon how to have it drawn. So home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-10-8" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-10-08">28th (Office day)</time>. This morning Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten and <abbr>Col.</abbr> Slingsby went with <abbr>Col.</abbr> Birch and Sir <abbr class="name">Wm.</abbr> Doyly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-714" id="noteref-714" epub:type="noteref">714</a> to Chatham to pay off a ship there. So only Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen and I left here in town. All the afternoon among my workmen till 10 or 11 at night, and did give them drink and very merry with them, it being my luck to meet with a sort of drolling workmen on all occasions. To bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-10-9" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-10-09">29th</time>. All day at home to make an end of our dirty work of the plasterers, and indeed my kitchen is now so handsome that I did not repent of all the trouble that I have been put to, to have it done. This day or yesterday, I hear, Prince Rupert<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-715" id="noteref-715" epub:type="noteref">715</a> is come to Court; but welcome to nobody.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-10-10" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-10-10">30th (Lord’s day)</time>. To our Parish church both forenoon and afternoon all alone. At night went to bed without prayers, my house being everywhere foul above stairs.</p>
			</article>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
