<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>June 1668</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-102" epub:type="chapter z3998:diary">
			<h2 epub:type="title">June 1668</h2>
			<article id="entry-1668-6-11" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-06-11">June 1st</time>. Up and with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes to Westminster, and in the Hall there I met with Harris and Rolt, and carried them to the Rhenish wine-house,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4079" id="noteref-4079" epub:type="noteref">4079</a> where I have not been in a morning⁠—nor any tavern, I think, these seven years and more. Here I did get the words of a song of Harris that I wanted. Here also <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Young and Whistler by chance met us, and drank with us. Thence home, and to prepare business against the afternoon, and did walk an hour in the garden with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Warren, who do tell me of the great difficulty he is under in the business of his accounts with the Commissioners of Parliament, and I fear some inconveniences and troubles may be occasioned thereby to me. So to dinner, and then with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes to Whitehall, and there attended the Lords of the Treasury and also a committee of Council with the Duke of York about the charge of this year’s fleet, and thence I to Westminster and to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Martin’s, and did <i xml:lang="fr">hazer</i> what <i xml:lang="fr">je</i> would <i xml:lang="es">con</i> her, and did once <i xml:lang="fr">toker la</i> thigh <i xml:lang="fr">de</i> <i xml:lang="es">su</i> landlady, and thence all alone to Fox Hall, and walked and saw young Newport, and two more rogues of the town, seize on two ladies, who walked with them an hour with their masks on; perhaps civil ladies; and there I left them, and so home, and thence to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mills’s, where I never was before, and here find, whom I indeed saw go in, and that did make me go thither, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hallworthy and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Andrews, and here supped, and, extraordinary merry till one in the morning, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Andrews coming to us: and mightily pleased with this night’s company and mirth I home to bed. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Turner, too, was with us.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-6-12" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-06-12">2nd</time>. Up, and to the office, where all the morning. At noon home to dinner, and there dined with me, besides my own people, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batelier and Mercer, and we very merry. After dinner, they gone, only Mercer and I to sing a while, and then parted, and I out and took a coach, and called Mercer at their backdoor, and she brought with her <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Knightly, a little pretty sober girl, and I carried them to Old Ford, a town by Bow, where I never was before, and there walked in the fields very pleasant, and sang: and so back again, and stopped and drank at the Gun, at Mile End, and so to the Old Exchange door, and did buy them a pound of cherries, cost me 2<abbr>s.</abbr>, and so set them down again; and I to my little mercer’s Finch, that lives now in the Minories, where I have left my cloak, and did here <i xml:lang="fr">baiser</i> <i xml:lang="es">su moher</i>, a <i xml:lang="fr">belle femme</i>, and there took my cloak which I had left there, and so by water, it being now about nine o’clock, down to Deptford, where I have not been many a day, and there it being dark I did by agreement <i xml:lang="fr">aller à la</i> house <i xml:lang="fr">de</i> Bagwell, and there after a little playing and <i xml:lang="fr">baisando</i> we did go up in the dark <i xml:lang="it">a su camera</i>⁠ ⁠… and to my boat again, and against the tide home. Got there by twelve o’clock, taking into my boat, for company, a man that desired a passage⁠—a certain western bargeman, with whom I had good sport, talking of the old woman of Woolwich,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4080" id="noteref-4080" epub:type="noteref">4080</a> and telling him the whole story.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-6-13" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-06-13">3rd</time>. Up, and to the office, where busy till 9 o’clock, and then to Whitehall, to the Council-chamber, where I did present the Duke of York with an account of the charge of the present fleet, to his satisfaction; and this being done, did ask his leave for my going out of town five or six days, which he did give me, saying, that my diligence in the King’s business was such, that I ought not to be denied when my own business called me any whither. Thence with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D.</abbr> Gawden to Westminster, where I did take a turn or two, and met Roger Pepys, who is mighty earnest for me to stay from going into the country till he goes, and to bring my people thither for some time: but I cannot, but will find another time this summer for it. Thence with him home, and there to the office till noon, and then with Lord Brouncker, Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes, and Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Carteret, upon whose accounts they have been this day to the Three Tuns to dinner, and thence back again home, and after doing a little business I by coach to the King’s house, and there saw good part of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Scornful Lady</i>, and that done, would have taken out Knepp, but she was engaged, and so to my Lord Crew’s to visit him; from whom I learn nothing but that there hath been some controversy at the Council-table, about my Lord Sandwich’s signing, where some would not have had him, in the treaty with Portugal; but all, I think, is over in it. Thence by coach to Westminster to the Hall, and thence to the Park, where much good company, and many fine ladies; and in so handsome a hackney I was, that I believe Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Coventry and others, who looked on me, did take me to be in one of my own, which I was a little troubled for. So to the lodge, and drank a cup of new milk, and so home, and there to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Turner’s, and sat and talked with her, and then home to bed, having laid my business with <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Hewer to go out of town Friday next, with hopes of a great deal of pleasure.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-6-14" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-06-14">4th</time>. Up, and to the office, where all the morning, and at noon home to dinner, where <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Clerke, the solicitor, dined with me and my clerks. After dinner I carried and set him down at the Temple, he observing to me how <abbr>St.</abbr> Sepulchre’s church steeple is repaired already<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4081" id="noteref-4081" epub:type="noteref">4081</a> a good deal, and the Fleet Bridge is contracted for by the City to begin to be built this summer, which do please me mightily. I to Whitehall, and walked through the Park for a little air; and so back to the Council-chamber, to the Committee of the Navy, about the business of fitting the present fleet, suitable to the money given, which, as the King orders it, and by what appears, will be very little; and so as I perceive the Duke of York will have nothing to command, nor can intend to go abroad. But it is pretty to see how careful these great men are to do everything so as they may answer it to the Parliament, thinking themselves safe in nothing but where the judges, with whom they often advise, do say the matter is doubtful; and so they take upon themselves then to be the chief persons to interpret what is doubtful. Thence home, and all the evening to set matters in order against my going to Brampton tomorrow, being resolved upon my journey, and having the Duke of York’s leave again today; though I do plainly see that I can very ill be spared now, there being much business, especially about this, which I have attended the Council about, and I the man that am alone consulted with; and, besides, my Lord Brouncker is at this time ill, and Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn. So things being put in order at the Office, I home to do the like there; and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-6-15" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-06-15">5th (Friday)</time>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4082" id="noteref-4082" epub:type="noteref">4082</a> At Barnet, for milk, 6<abbr>d.</abbr> On the highway, to menders of the highway, 6<abbr>d.</abbr> Dinner at Stevenage, 5<abbr>s.</abbr> 6<abbr class="eoc">d.</abbr></p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-6-16" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-06-16">6th (Saturday)</time>. Spent at Huntingdon with Bowles, and Appleyard, and Shepley, 2<abbr class="eoc">s.</abbr></p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-6-17" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-06-17">7th (Sunday)</time>. My father, for money lent, and horse-hire £1 11<abbr class="eoc">s.</abbr></p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-6-18" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-06-18">8th (Monday)</time>. Father’s servants (father having in the garden told me bad stories of my wife’s ill words), 14<abbr>s.</abbr>; one that helped at the horses, 2<abbr>s.</abbr>; menders of the highway, 2<abbr>s.</abbr> Pleasant country to Bedford, where, while they stay, I rode through the town; and a good country-town; and there, drinking, 1<abbr>s.</abbr> We on to Newport; and there ’light, and I and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Hewer to the Church, and there give the boy 1<abbr>s.</abbr> So to Buckingham, a good old town. Here I to see the Church, which very good, and the leads, and a school in it: did give the sexton’s boy 1<abbr>s.</abbr> A fair bridge here, with many arches: vexed at my people’s making me lose so much time; reckoning, 13<abbr>s.</abbr> 4<abbr>d.</abbr> Mighty pleased with the pleasure of the ground all the day. At night to Newport Pagnell;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4083" id="noteref-4083" epub:type="noteref">4083</a> and there a good pleasant country-town, but few people in it. A very fair⁠—and like a Cathedral⁠—Church; and I saw the leads, and a vault that goes far under ground, and here lay with Betty Turner’s sparrow: the town, and so most of this country, well watered. Lay here well, and rose next day by four o’clock: few people in the town: and so away. Reckoning for supper, 19<abbr>s.</abbr> 6<abbr>d.</abbr>; poor, 6<abbr>d.</abbr> Mischance to the coach, but no time lost.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-6-19" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-06-19">9th (Tuesday)</time>. When come to Oxford, a very sweet place: paid our guide, £1 2<abbr>s.</abbr> 6<abbr>d.</abbr>; barber, 2<abbr>s.</abbr> 6<abbr>d.</abbr>; book, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Stonage</i>, 4<abbr>s.</abbr><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4084" id="noteref-4084" epub:type="noteref">4084</a> To dinner; and then out with my wife and people, and landlord: and to him that showed us the schools and library, 10<abbr>s.</abbr>; to him that showed us All Souls’ College, and Chichly’s picture,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4085" id="noteref-4085" epub:type="noteref">4085</a> 5<abbr>s.</abbr> So to see Christ Church with my wife, I seeing several others very fine alone, with <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Hewer, before dinner, and did give the boy that went with me 1<abbr>s.</abbr> Strawberries, 1<abbr>s.</abbr> 2<abbr>d.</abbr> Dinner and servants, £1 0<abbr>s.</abbr> 6<abbr>d.</abbr> After come home from the schools, I out with the landlord to Brazen-nose College;⁠—to the butteries, and in the cellar find the hand of the Child of Hales,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4086" id="noteref-4086" epub:type="noteref">4086</a>⁠ ⁠… long. Butler, 2<abbr>s.</abbr> Thence with coach and people to Physic-garden, 1<abbr>s.</abbr> So to Friar Bacon’s study: I up and saw it, and give the man 1<abbr>s.</abbr> Bottle of sack for landlord, 2<abbr>s.</abbr> Oxford mighty fine place; and well seated, and cheap entertainment. At night come to Abingdon, where had been a fair of custard; and met many people and scholars going home; and there did get some pretty good music, and sang and danced till supper: 5<abbr class="eoc">s.</abbr></p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-6-20" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-06-20">10th (Wednesday)</time>. Up, and walked to the Hospitall:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4087" id="noteref-4087" epub:type="noteref">4087</a> very large and fine; and pictures of founders, and the History<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4088" id="noteref-4088" epub:type="noteref">4088</a> of the Hospitall; and is said to be worth £700 per annum; and that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Foly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4089" id="noteref-4089" epub:type="noteref">4089</a> was here lately to see how their lands were settled; and here, in old English, the story of the occasion of it, and a rebus at the bottom.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4090" id="noteref-4090" epub:type="noteref">4090</a> So did give the poor, which they would not take but in their box, 2<abbr>s.</abbr> 6<abbr>d.</abbr> So to the inn, and paid the reckoning and whatnot, 13<abbr>s.</abbr> So forth towards Hungerford, led this good way by our landlord, one Heart, an old but very civil and well-spoken man, more than I ever heard, of his quality. He gone, we forward; and I vexed at my people’s not minding the way. So come to Hungerford, where very good trouts, eels, and crayfish. Dinner: a mean town. At dinner there, 12<abbr>s.</abbr> Thence set out with a guide, who saw us to Newmarket-heath,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4091" id="noteref-4091" epub:type="noteref">4091</a> and then left us, 3<abbr>s.</abbr> 6<abbr>d.</abbr> So all over the Plain by the sight of the steeple, the Plain high and low, to Salisbury, by night; but before I come to the town, I saw a great fortification, and there ’light, and to it and in it; and find it prodigious, so as to frighten me to be in it all alone at that time of night, it being dark. I understand, since, it to be that, that is called Old Sarum.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4092" id="noteref-4092" epub:type="noteref">4092</a> Come to the George Inne, where lay in a silk bed; and very good diet. To supper; then to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-6-21" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-06-21">11th (Thursday)</time>. Up, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Hewer and I up and down the town, and find it a very brave place. The river goes through every street; and a most capacious marketplace. The city great, I think greater than Hereford. But the Minster most admirable;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4093" id="noteref-4093" epub:type="noteref">4093</a> as big, I think, and handsomer than Westminster: and a most large Close about it, and houses for the Officers thereof, and a fine palace for the Bishop. So to my lodging back, and took out my wife and people to show them the town and Church; but they being at prayers, we could not be shown the Choir. A very good organ; and I looked in, and saw the Bishop, my friend <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Ward.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4094" id="noteref-4094" epub:type="noteref">4094</a> Thence to the inne; and there not being able to hire coach-horses, and not willing to use our own, we got saddle-horses, very dear. Boy that went to look for them, 6<abbr>d.</abbr> So the three women behind <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Hewer, Murford, and our guide, and I single to Stonage; over the Plain and some great hills, even to fright us. Come thither, and find them as prodigious as any tales I ever heard of them, and worth going this journey to see. God knows what their use was! they are hard to tell, but yet maybe told. Give the shepherd-woman, for leading our horses, 4<abbr>d.</abbr> So back by Wilton, my Lord Pembroke’s house, which we could not see, he being just coming to town; but the situation I do not like, nor the house promise much, it being in a low but rich valley. So back home; and there being ’light, we to the Church, and there find them at prayers again, so could not see the Choir; but I sent the women home, and I did go in, and saw very many fine tombs, and among the rest some very ancient, of the Montagus.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4095" id="noteref-4095" epub:type="noteref">4095</a> So home to dinner; and, that being done, paid the reckoning, which was so exorbitant; and particular in rate of my horses, and 7<abbr>s.</abbr> 6<abbr>d.</abbr> for bread and beer, that I was mad, and resolve to trouble the master about it, and get something for the poor; and come away in that humour: £2 5<abbr>s.</abbr> 6<abbr>d.</abbr> Servants, 1<abbr>s.</abbr> 6<abbr>d.</abbr>; poor, 1<abbr>s.</abbr>; guide to the Stones, 2<abbr>s.</abbr>; poor woman in the street, 1<abbr>s.</abbr>; ribbons, 9<abbr>d.</abbr>; washwoman, 1<abbr>s.</abbr>; sempstress for <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Hewer, 3<abbr>s.</abbr>; lent <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Hewer, 3<abbr>s.</abbr> Thence about six o’clock, and with a guide went over the smooth Plain indeed till night; and then by a happy mistake, and that looked like an adventure, we were carried out of our way to a town where we would lie, since we could not go so far as we would. And there with great difficulty come about ten at night to a little inn, where we were fain to go into a room where a pedlar was in bed, and made him rise; and there wife and I lay, and in a truckle-bed Betty Turner and Willett. But good beds, and the master of the house a sober, understanding man, and I had good discourse with him about this country’s matters, as wool, and corne, and other things. And he also merry, and made us mighty merry at supper, about manning the new ship, at Bristol, with none but men whose wives do master them; and it seems it is become in reproach to some men of estate that are such hereabouts, that this is become common talk. By and by to bed, glad of this mistake, because, it seems, had we gone on as we intended, we could not have passed with our coach, and must have lain on the Plain all night. This day from Salisbury I wrote by the post my excuse for not coming home, which I hope will do, for I am resolved to see the Bath, and, it may be, Bristol.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-6-22" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-06-22">12th (Friday)</time>. Up, finding our beds good, but lousy; which made us merry. We set out, the reckoning and servants coming to 9<abbr>s.</abbr> 6<abbr>d.</abbr>; my guide thither, 2<abbr>s.</abbr>; coachman, advanced, 10<abbr>s.</abbr> So rode a very good way, led to my great content by our landlord to Philips-Norton, with great pleasure, being now come into Somersetshire; where my wife and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Deb.</abbr> mightily joyed thereat<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4096" id="noteref-4096" epub:type="noteref">4096</a> I commending the country, as indeed it deserves. And the first town we came to was Brekington, where, we stopping for something for the horses, we called two or three little boys to us, and pleased ourselves with their manner of speech,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4097" id="noteref-4097" epub:type="noteref">4097</a> and did make one of them kiss <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Deb.</abbr>, and another say the Lord’s Prayer (hallowed be thy kingdom come). At Philips-Norton I walked to the Church, and there saw a very ancient tomb of some Knight Templar, I think; and here saw the tombstone whereon there were only two heads cut, which, the story goes, and credibly, were two sisters, called the Fair Maids of Foscott,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4098" id="noteref-4098" epub:type="noteref">4098</a> that had two bodies upward and one belly, and there lie buried. Here is also a very fine ring of six bells, and they mighty tuneable. Having dined very well, 10<abbr>s.</abbr>, we come before night to the Bath; where I presently stepped out with my landlord, and saw the baths, with people in them. They are not so large as I expected, but yet pleasant; and the town most of stone, and clean, though the streets generally narrow. I home, and being weary, went to bed without supper; the rest supping.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-6-23" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-06-23">13th (Saturday)</time>. Up at four o’clock, being by appointment called up to the Cross Bath,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4099" id="noteref-4099" epub:type="noteref">4099</a> where we were carried one after one another, myself, and wife, and Betty Turner, Willet, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Hewer. And by and by, though we designed to have done before company come, much company come; very fine ladies; and the manner pretty enough, only methinks it cannot be clean to go so many bodies together in the same water. Good conversation among them that are acquainted here, and stay together. Strange to see how hot the water is; and in some places, though this is the most temperate bath, the springs so hot as the feet not able to endure. But strange to see, when women and men herein, that live all the season in these waters, that cannot but be parboiled, and look like the creatures of the bath! Carried away, wrapped in a sheet, and in a chair, home; and there one after another thus carried, I staying above two hours in the water, home to bed, sweating for an hour; and by and by, comes music to play to me, extraordinary good as ever I heard at London almost, or anywhere: 5<abbr>s.</abbr> Up, to go to Bristol, about eleven o’clock, and paying my landlord that was our guide from Chiltern, 10<abbr>s.</abbr>, and the serjeant of the bath, 10<abbr>s.</abbr>, and the man that carried us in chairs, 3<abbr>s.</abbr> 6<abbr>d.</abbr> Set out towards Bristoll, and come thither (in a coach hired to spare our own horses); the way bad, but country good, about two o’clock, where set down at the Horse-shoe, and there, being trimmed by a very handsome fellow, 2<abbr>s.</abbr>, walked with my wife and people through the city, which is in every respect another London, that one can hardly know it, to stand in the country, no more than that. No carts, it standing generally on vaults, only dogcarts.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4100" id="noteref-4100" epub:type="noteref">4100</a> So to the Three Crowns Tavern I was directed; but, when I come in, the master told me that he had newly given over the selling of wine; it seems, grown rich; and so went to the Sun; and there <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Deb.</abbr> going with <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Hewer and Betty Turner to see her uncle [Butts], and leaving my wife with the mistress of the house, I to see the quay, which is a most large and noble place; and to see the new ship building by Bally,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4101" id="noteref-4101" epub:type="noteref">4101</a> neither he nor Furzer<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4102" id="noteref-4102" epub:type="noteref">4102</a> being in town. It will be a fine ship. Spoke with the foreman, and did give the boys that kept the cabin 2<abbr>s.</abbr> Walked back to the Sun, where I find <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Deb.</abbr> come back, and with her, her uncle, a sober merchant, very good company, and so like one of our sober, wealthy, London merchants, as pleased me mightily. Here we dined, and much good talk with him, 7<abbr>s.</abbr> 6<abbr>d.</abbr>: a messenger to Sir John Knight,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4103" id="noteref-4103" epub:type="noteref">4103</a> who was not at home, 6<abbr>d.</abbr> Then walked with him [Butts] and my wife and company round the quay, and to the ship; and he showed me the Customhouse, and made me understand many things of the place, and led us through Marsh Street, where our girl was born. But, Lord! the joy that was among the old poor people of the place, to see <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Willet’s daughter, it seems her mother being a brave woman and mightily beloved! And so brought us a back way by surprise to his house, where a substantial good house, and well furnished; and did give us good entertainment of strawberries, a whole venison-pasty, cold, and plenty of brave wine, and above all Bristoll milk,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4104" id="noteref-4104" epub:type="noteref">4104</a> where comes in another poor woman, who, hearing that <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Deb.</abbr> was here, did come running hither, and with her eyes so full of tears, and heart so full of joy, that she could not speak when she come in, that it made me weep too: I protest that I was not able to speak to her, which I would have done, to have diverted her tears. His wife a good woman, and so sober and substantiall as I was never more pleased anywhere. Servant-maid, 2<abbr>s.</abbr> So thence took leave, and he with us through the city, where in walking I find the city pay him great respect, and he the like to the meanest, which pleased me mightily. He showed us the place where the merchants meet here, and a fine Cross yet standing, like Cheapside. And so to the Horseshoe, where paid the reckoning, 2<abbr>s.</abbr> 6<abbr>d.</abbr> We back, and by moonshine to the Bath again, about ten-o’clock: bad way; and giving the coachman 1<abbr>s.</abbr>, went all of us to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-6-24" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-06-24">14th (Sunday)</time>. Up, and walked up and down the town, and saw a pretty good marketplace, and many good streets, and very fair stone-houses. And so to the great Church,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4105" id="noteref-4105" epub:type="noteref">4105</a> and there saw Bishop Montagu’s tomb;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4106" id="noteref-4106" epub:type="noteref">4106</a> and, when placed, did there see many brave people come, and, among others, two men brought in, in litters, and set down in the chancel to hear: but I did not know one face. Here a good organ; but a vain, pragmatical fellow preached a ridiculous, affected sermon, that made me angry, and some gentlemen that sat next me, and sang well. So home, walking round the walls of the City, which are good, and the battlements all whole. The sexton of the church 1<abbr>s.</abbr> So home to dinner, and after dinner comes <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Butts again to see me, and he and I to church, where the same idle fellow preached; and I slept most of the sermon. Thence home, and took my wife out and the girls, and come to this church again, to see it, and look over the monuments, where, among others, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Venner<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4107" id="noteref-4107" epub:type="noteref">4107</a> and Pelling,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4108" id="noteref-4108" epub:type="noteref">4108</a> and a lady of Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Waller’s;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4109" id="noteref-4109" epub:type="noteref">4109</a> he lying with his face broken. So to the fields a little and walked, and then home and had my head looked [at], and so to supper, and then comes my landlord to me, a sober understanding man, and did give me a good account of the antiquity of this town and Wells; and of two Heads, on two pillars, in Wells church. But he a Catholick. So he gone, I to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-6-25" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-06-25">15th (Monday)</time>. Up, and with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Butts to look into the baths, and find the King and Queen’s full of a mixed sort, of good and bad, and the Cross only almost for the gentry. So home and did the like with my wife, and did pay my guides, two women, 5<abbr>s.</abbr>; one man, 2<abbr>s.</abbr> 6<abbr>d.</abbr>; poor, 6<abbr>d.</abbr>; woman to lay my foot-cloth, 1<abbr>s.</abbr> So to our inne, and there eat and paid reckoning, £1 8<abbr>s.</abbr> 6<abbr>d.</abbr>; servants, 3<abbr>s.</abbr>; poor, 1<abbr>s.</abbr>; lent the coach man, 10<abbr class="eoc">s.</abbr> Before I took coach, I went to make a boy dive in the King’s bath, 1<abbr class="eoc">s.</abbr> I paid also for my coach and a horse to Bristol, £1 1<abbr>s.</abbr> 6<abbr class="eoc">d.</abbr> Took coach, and away, without any of the company of the other stagecoaches, that go out of this town today; and rode all day with some trouble, for fear of being out of our way, over the Downs, where the life of the shepherds is, in fair weather only, pretty. In the afternoon come to Avebury,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4110" id="noteref-4110" epub:type="noteref">4110</a> where, seeing great stones like those of Stonage standing up, I stopped, and took a countryman of that town, and he carried me and showed me a place trenched in,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4111" id="noteref-4111" epub:type="noteref">4111</a> like Old Sarum almost, with great stones pitched in it, some bigger than those at Stonage in figure, to my great admiration: and he told me that most people of learning, coming by, do come and view them, and that the King did so: and that the Mount cast hard by is called Selbury,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4112" id="noteref-4112" epub:type="noteref">4112</a> from one King Seall buried there, as tradition says. I did give this man 1<abbr>s.</abbr> So took coach again, seeing one place with great high stones pitched round, which, I believe, was once some particular building, in some measure like that of Stonage. But, about a mile off, it was prodigious to see how full the Downs are of great stones; and all along the valleys, stones of considerable bigness, most of them growing certainly out of the ground so thick as to cover the ground, which makes me think the less of the wonder of Stonage, for hence they might undoubtedly supply themselves with stones, as well as those at Avebury. In my way did give to the poor and menders of the highway 3<abbr class="eoc">s.</abbr> Before night, come to Marlborough, and lay at the Hart; a good house, and a pretty fair town for a street or two; and what is most singular is, their houses on one side having their penthouses supported with pillars, which makes it a good walk. My wife pleased with all, this evening reading of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Mustapha</i> to me till supper, and then to supper, and had music whose innocence pleased me, and I did give them 3<abbr class="eoc">s.</abbr> So to bed, and lay well all night, and long, so as all the five coaches that come this day from Bath, as well as we, were gone out of the town before six.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-6-26" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-06-26">16th (Tuesday)</time>. So paying the reckoning, 14<abbr>s.</abbr> 4<abbr>d.</abbr>, and servants, 2<abbr>s.</abbr>, poor 1<abbr>s.</abbr>, set out; and overtook one coach and kept a while company with it, till one of our horses losing a shoe, we stopped and drank and spent 1<abbr>s.</abbr> So on, and passing through a good part of this county of Wiltshire, saw a good house<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4113" id="noteref-4113" epub:type="noteref">4113</a> of Alexander Popham’s,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4114" id="noteref-4114" epub:type="noteref">4114</a> and another of my Lord Craven’s,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4115" id="noteref-4115" epub:type="noteref">4115</a> I think in Barkeshire. Come to Newbery, and there dined, which cost me, and music, which a song of the old courtier of Queen Elizabeth’s,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4116" id="noteref-4116" epub:type="noteref">4116</a> and how he was changed upon the coming in of the King, did please me mightily, and I did cause <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Hewer to write it out, 3<abbr>s.</abbr> 6<abbr>d.</abbr> Then comes the reckoning, forced to change gold, 8<abbr>s.</abbr> 7<abbr>d.</abbr>; servants and poor, 1<abbr>s.</abbr> 6<abbr>d.</abbr> So out, and lost our way, which made me vexed, but come into it again; and in the evening betimes come to Reading, and there heard my wife read more of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Mustapha</i>, and then to supper, and then I to walk about the town, which is a very great one, I think bigger than Salsbury: a river<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4117" id="noteref-4117" epub:type="noteref">4117</a> runs through it, in seven branches, and unite in one, in one part of the town, and runs into the Thames half-a-mile off one odd sign of the Broad Face. <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Hewer troubled with the headache we had none of his company last night, nor all this day nor night to talk. Then to my inn, and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-6-27" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-06-27">17th (Wednesday)</time>. Rose, and paying the reckoning, 12<abbr>s.</abbr> 6<abbr>d.</abbr>; servants and poor, 2<abbr>s.</abbr> 6<abbr>d.</abbr>; music, the worst we have had, coming to our chamber-door, but calling us by wrong names, we lay; so set out with one coach in company, and through Maidenhead, which I never saw before, to Colebrooke<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4118" id="noteref-4118" epub:type="noteref">4118</a> by noon; the way mighty good; and there dined, and fitted ourselves a little to go through London, anon. Somewhat out of humour all day, reflecting on my wife’s neglect of things, and impertinent humour got by this liberty of being from me, which she is never to be trusted with; for she is a fool. Thence pleasant way to London, before night, and find all very well, to great content; and there to talk with my wife, and saw Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn, who is well again. I hear of the ill news by the great fire at Barbados. By and by home, and there with my people to supper, all in pretty good humour, though I find my wife hath something in her gizzard, that only waits an opportunity of being provoked to bring up; but I will not, for my content-sake, give it. So I to bed, glad to find all so well here, and slept well.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4119" id="noteref-4119" epub:type="noteref">4119</a></p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-6-28" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-06-28">18th</time>. Up betimes and to the office, there to set my papers in order and books, my office having been new whited and windows made clean, and so to sit, where all the morning, and did receive a hint or two from my Lord Anglesey, as if he thought much of my taking the air as I have done; but I care not a turd; but whatever the matter is, I think he hath some ill-will to me, or at least an opinion that I am more the servant of the Board than I am. At noon home to dinner, where my wife still in a melancholy, fusty humour, and crying, and do not tell me plainly what it is; but I by little words find that she hath heard of my going to plays, and carrying people abroad every day, in her absence; and that I cannot help but the storm will break out, I think, in a little time. After dinner carried her by coach to <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s, where she sat in the coach till I to my Lady Peterborough’s, who tells me, among other things, her Lord’s good words to the Duke of York lately, about my Lord Sandwich, and that the Duke of York is kind to my Lord Sandwich, which I am glad to hear: my business here was about her Lord’s pension from Tangier. Here met with Povy, who tells me how hard Creed is upon him, though he did give him, about six months since, I think he said, fifty pieces in gold; and one thing there is in his accounts that I fear may touch me, but I shall help it, I hope. So my wife not speaking a word, going nor coming, nor willing to go to a play, though a new one, I to the Office, and did much business. At night home, where supped <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Turner and his wife, and Betty and Mercer and Pelling, as merry as the ill, melancholy humour that my wife was in, would let us, which vexed me; but I took no notice of it, thinking that will be the best way, and let it wear away itself. After supper, parted, and to bed; and my wife troubled all night, and about one o’clock goes out of the bed to the girl’s bed, which did trouble me, she crying and sobbing, without telling the cause. By and by she comes back to me, and still crying; I then rose, and would have sat up all night, but she would have me come to bed again; and being pretty well pacified, we to sleep.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-6-29" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-06-29">19th</time>. When between two and three in the morning we were waked with my maids crying out, “Fire, fire, in Mark Lane!” So I rose and looked out, and it was dreadful; and strange apprehensions in me, and us all, of being presently burnt. So we all rose; and my care presently was to secure my gold, and plate, and papers, and could quickly have done it, but I went forth to see where it was; and the whole town was presently in the streets; and I found it in a new-built house that stood alone in Minchin-lane, over against the Cloth-workers’-hall, which burned furiously: the house not yet quite finished; and the benefit of brick was well seen, for it burnt all inward, and fell down within itself; so no fear of doing more hurt. So homeward, and stopped at <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Mills’s, where he and she at the door, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Turner, and Betty, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Hollworthy, and there I stayed and talked, and up to the church leads, and saw the fire, which spent itself, till all fear over. I home, and there we to bed again, and slept pretty well, and about nine rose, and then my wife fell into her blubbering again, and at length had a request to make to me, which was, that she might go into France, and live there, out of trouble; and then all come out, that I loved pleasure and denied her any, and a deal of do; and I find that there have been great fallings out between my father and her, whom, forever hereafter, I must keep asunder, for they cannot possibly agree. And I said nothing, but, with very mild words and few, suffered her humour to spend, till we begun to be very quiet, and I think all will be over, and friends, and so I to the office, where all the morning doing business. Yesterday I heard how my Lord Ashly is like to die, having some imposthume in his breast, that he hath been fain to be cut into the body.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4120" id="noteref-4120" epub:type="noteref">4120</a> At noon home to dinner, and thence by coach to Whitehall, where we attended the Duke of York in his closet, upon our usual business. And thence out, and did see many of the Knights of the Garter, with the King and Duke of York, going into the Privychamber, to elect the Elector of Saxony<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4121" id="noteref-4121" epub:type="noteref">4121</a> into that Order, who, I did hear the Duke of York say, was a good drinker: I know not upon what score this compliment is done him. Thence with <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn, who is in great pain of the gout, by coach round by Holborne home, he being at every kennel full of pain. Thence home, and by and by comes my wife and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Deb.</abbr> home, have been at the King’s playhouse today, thinking to spy me there; and saw the new play, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Evening Love</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4122" id="noteref-4122" epub:type="noteref">4122</a> of Dryden’s, which, though the world commends, she likes not. So to supper and talk, and all in good humour, and then to bed, where I slept not well, from my apprehensions of some trouble about some business of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Povy’s he told me of the other day.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-6-30" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-06-30">20th</time>. Up, and talked with my wife all in good humour, and so to the office, where all the morning, and then home to dinner, and so she and I alone to the King’s house, and there I saw this new play my wife saw yesterday, and do not like it, it being very smutty, and nothing so good as <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Maiden Queen</i>, or <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Indian Emperour</i>, of his making, that I was troubled at it; and my wife tells me wholly (which he confesses a little in the epilogue) taken out of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Illustre Bassa</i>. So she to Unthanke’s and I to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Povy, and there settled some business; and here talked of things, and he thinks there will be great revolutions, and that Creed will be a great man, though a rogue, he being a man of the old strain, which will now be up again. So I took coach, and set Povy down at Charing Cross, and took my wife up, and calling at the New Exchange at Smith’s shop, and kissed her pretty hand, and so we home, and there able to do nothing by candlelight, my eyes being now constantly so bad that I must take present advice or be blind. So to supper, grieved for my eyes, and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-7-1" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-07-01">21st (Lord’s day)</time>. Up, and to church, and home and dined with my wife and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Deb.</abbr> alone, but merry and in good humour, which is, when all is done, the greatest felicity of all, and after dinner she to read in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Illustre Bassa</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4123" id="noteref-4123" epub:type="noteref">4123</a> the plot of yesterday’s play, which is most exactly the same, and so to church I alone, and thence to see Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn, who is ill again, and then home, and there get my wife to read to me till supper, and then to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-7-2" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-07-02">22nd</time>. Up, and with Balty to <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s, and there presented him to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Wren about his being Muster-Master this year, which will be done. So up to wait on the Duke of York, and thence, with <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Coventry, walked to Whitehall good discourse about the Navy, where want of money undoes us. Thence to the Harp and Ball I to drink, and so to the Coffeehouse in Covent Garden; but met with nobody but Sir Philip Howard, who shamed me before the whole house there, in commendation of my speech in Parliament, and thence I away home to dinner alone, my wife being at her tailor’s, and after dinner comes Creed, whom I hate, to speak with me, and before him comes <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Daniel about business.⁠ ⁠… She gone, Creed and I to the King’s playhouse, and saw an act or two of the new play [<i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Evening’s Love</i>] again, but like it not. Calling this day at Herringman’s,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4124" id="noteref-4124" epub:type="noteref">4124</a> he tells me Dryden do himself call it but a fifth-rate play. Thence with him to my Lord Brouncker’s, where a Council of the Royal Society; and there heard <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Harry Howard’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4125" id="noteref-4125" epub:type="noteref">4125</a> noble offers about ground for our College, and his intentions of building his own house there most nobly. My business was to meet <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Boyle, which I did, and discoursed about my eyes; and he did give me the best advice he could, but refers me to one Turberville,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4126" id="noteref-4126" epub:type="noteref">4126</a> of Salsbury, lately come to town, which I will go to. Thence home, where the streets full, at our end of the town, removing their wine against the Act begins, which will be two days hence, to raise the price. I did get my store in of Batelier this night. So home to supper and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-7-3" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-07-03">23rd</time>. Up, and all the morning at the office. At noon home to dinner, and so to the office again all the afternoon, and then to Westminster to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Turberville about my eyes, whom I met with: and he did discourse, I thought, learnedly about them; and takes time before he did prescribe me anything, to think of it. So I away with my wife and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Deb.</abbr>, whom I left at Unthanke’s, and so to Hercules Pillars, and there we three supped on cold powdered beef, and thence home and in the garden walked a good while with Deane, talking well of the Navy miscarriages and faults. So home to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-7-4" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-07-04">24th</time>. Up, and Creed and Colonel Atkins come to me about sending coals to Tangier: and upon that most of the morning. Thence Creed and I to Alderman Backewell’s about Tangier business of money, and thence I by water (calling and drinking, but not <i xml:lang="es">baisado</i>, at Michell’s) to Westminster, but it being holyday did no business, only to Martin’s⁠ ⁠… and so home again by water, and busy till dinner, and then with wife, Mercer, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Deb.</abbr>, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Hewer to the Duke of York’s playhouse, and there saw <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Impertinents</i>, a pretty good play; and so by water to Spring Garden, and there supped, and so home, not very merry, only when we come home, Mercer and I sat and sung in the garden a good while, and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-7-5" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-07-05">25th</time>. Up, and to the office all the morning, and after dinner at home to the office again, and there all the afternoon very busy till night, and then home to supper and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-7-6" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-07-06">26th</time>. All the morning doing business at the office. At noon, with my Fellow-Officers, to the Dolphin, at Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Carteret’s charge, to dinner, he having some accounts examined this morning. All the afternoon we all at Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn’s with him about the Victuallers’ accounts, and then in the evening to Charing Cross, and there took up my wife at her tailor’s, and so home and to walk in the garden, and then to sup and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-7-7" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-07-07">27th</time>. At the office all the morning, at noon dined at home, and then my wife, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Deb.</abbr>, and I to the King’s playhouse, and saw <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Indian Queen</i>, but do not dote upon Nan Marshall’s acting therein, as the world talks of her excellence therein. Thence with my wife to buy some linen, £13 worth, for sheets, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, at the new shop over against the New Exchange; [and the master, who is] come out of London<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4127" id="noteref-4127" epub:type="noteref">4127</a> since the fire, says his and other tradesmen’s retail trade is so great here, and better than it was in London, that they believe they shall not return, nor the city be ever so great for retail as heretofore. So home and to my business, and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-7-8" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-07-08">28th (Lord’s day)</time>. Up, and to church, and then home to dinner, where Betty Turner, Mercer, and Captain Deane, and after dinner to sing, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Pelling coming. Then, they gone, Deane and I all the afternoon till night to talk of navy matters and ships with great pleasure, and so at night, he gone, I to supper, Pelling coming again and singing a while, then to bed. Much talk of the French setting out their fleet afresh; but I hear nothing that our King is alarmed at it, at all, but rather making his fleet less.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4128" id="noteref-4128" epub:type="noteref">4128</a></p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-7-9" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-07-09">29th</time>. Called up by my Lady Peterborough’s servant about some business of hers, and so to the office. Thence by and by with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes toward <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s, and I stop at <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Turberville’s, and there did receive a direction for some physic, and also a glass of something to drop into my eyes: who gives me hopes that I may do well. Thence to <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s, and thence to Whitehall, where I find the Duke of York in the Council-chamber; where the Officers of the Navy were called in about Navy business, about calling in of more ships; the King of France having, as the Duke of York says, ordered his fleet to come in, notwithstanding what he had lately ordered for their staying abroad. Thence to the Chapel, it being <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter’s day, and did hear an anthem of Silas Taylor’s making; a dull, old-fashioned thing, of six and seven parts, that nobody could understand: and the Duke of York, when he come out, told me that he was a better storekeeper than anthem-maker, and that was bad enough, too. This morning <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> May<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4129" id="noteref-4129" epub:type="noteref">4129</a> showed me the King’s new buildings at Whitehall, very fine; and among other things, his ceilings, and his houses of office. So home to dinner, and then with my wife to the King’s playhouse⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Mulberry Garden</i>, which she had not seen. So by coach to Islington, and round by Hackney home with much pleasure, and to supper and bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-7-10" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-07-10">30th</time>. Up, and at the Office all the morning: then home to dinner, where a stinking leg of mutton, the weather being very wet and hot to keep meat in. Then to the Office again, all the afternoon: we met about the Victualler’s new contract. And so up, and to walk all the evening with my wife and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Turner in the garden, till supper, about eleven at night; and so, after supper, parted, and to bed, my eyes bad, but not worse, only weary with working. But, however, I very melancholy under the fear of my eyes being spoiled, and not to be recovered; for I am come that I am not able to read out a small letter, and yet my sight good for the little while I can read, as ever they were, I think.</p>
			</article>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
