<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>February 1660⁠–⁠61</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-14" epub:type="chapter z3998:diary">
			<h2 epub:type="title">February 1660⁠–⁠61</h2>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1661-02-11">
				<p><time datetime="1661-02-11">February 1st (Friday)</time>. A full office all this morning, and busy about answering the Commissioners of Parliament to their letter, wherein they desire to borrow two clerks of ours, which we will not grant them. After dinner into London and bought some books, and a belt, and had my sword new furbished. To the alehouse with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Brigden and <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Symons. At night home. So after a little music to bed, leaving my people up getting things ready against tomorrow’s dinner.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1661-02-12">
				<p><time datetime="1661-02-12">2nd</time>. Early to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore, and with him to Sir Peter Ball,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-915" id="noteref-915" epub:type="noteref">915</a> who proffers my uncle Robert much civility in letting him continue in the grounds which he had hired of Hetley who is now dead. Thence home, where all things in a hurry for dinner, a strange cook being come in the room of Slater, who could not come. There dined here my uncle Wight and my aunt, my father and mother, and my brother Tom, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Fairbrother and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mills, the parson, and his wife, who is a neighbour’s daughter of my uncle Robert’s, and knows my Aunt Wight and all her and my friends there; and so we had excellent company today. After dinner I was sent for to Sir <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Carteret’s, where he was, and I found the Comptroller, who are upon writing a letter to the Commissioners of Parliament in some things a rougher stile than our last, because they seem to speak high to us. So the Comptroller and I thence to a tavern hard by, and there did agree upon drawing up some letters to be sent to all the pursers and Clerks of the Cheques to make up their accounts. Then home; where I found the parson and his wife gone. And by and by the rest of the company, very well pleased, and I too; it being the last dinner I intend to make a great while, it having now cost me almost £15 in three dinners within this fortnight. In the evening comes Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen, pretty merry, to sit with me and talk, which we did for an hour or two, and so good night, and I to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1661-02-13">
				<p><time datetime="1661-02-13">3rd</time>.(Lord’s day). This day I first begun to go forth in my coat and sword, as the manner now among gentlemen is. To Whitehall. In my way heard <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thomas Fuller preach at the Savoy upon our forgiving of other men’s trespasses, showing among other things that we are to go to law never to revenge, but only to repayre, which I think a good distinction. So to White Hall; where I staid to hear the trumpets and kettledrums, and then the other drums, which are much cried up, though I think it dull, vulgar musique. So to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fox’s, unbid; where I had a good dinner and special company. Among other discourse, I observed one story, how my Lord of Northwich, at a public audience before the King of France, made the Duke of Anjou cry, by making ugly faces as he was stepping to the King, but undiscovered.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-916" id="noteref-916" epub:type="noteref">916</a> And how Sir Phillip Warwick’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-917" id="noteref-917" epub:type="noteref">917</a> lady did wonder to have <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Darcy<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-918" id="noteref-918" epub:type="noteref">918</a> send for several dozen bottles of Rhenish wine to her house, not knowing that the wine was his. Thence to my Lord’s; where I am told how Sir Thomas Crew’s Pedro, with two of his countrymen more, did last night kill one soldier of four that quarrelled with them in the street, about 10 o’clock. The other two are taken; but he is now hid at my Lord’s till night, that he do intend to make his escape away. So up to my Lady, and sat and talked with her long, and so to Westminster Stairs, and there took boat to the bridge, and so home, where I met with letters to call us all up tomorrow morning to Whitehall about office business.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1661-02-14">
				<p><time datetime="1661-02-14">4th</time>. Early up to Court with Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen, where, at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry’s chamber, we met with all our fellow officers, and there after a hot debate about the business of paying off the Fleet, and how far we should join with the Commissioners of Parliament, which is now the great business of this month more to determine, and about which there is a great deal of difference between us, and then how far we should be assistants to them therein. That being done, he and I back again home, where I met with my father and mother going to my cozen Snow’s to Blackwall, and had promised to bring me and my wife along with them, which we could not do because we are to go to the Dolphin today to a dinner of <abbr>Capt.</abbr> Tayler’s. So at last I let my wife go with them, and I to the tavern, where Sir William Pen and the Comptroller and several others were, men and women; and we had a very great and merry dinner; and after dinner the Comptroller begun some sports, among others the naming of people round and afterwards demanding questions of them that they are forced to answer their names to, which do make very good sport. And here I took pleasure to take the forfeits of the ladies who would not do their duty by kissing of them; among others a pretty lady, who I found afterwards to be wife to Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten’s son.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-919" id="noteref-919" epub:type="noteref">919</a> Home, and then with my wife to see Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten, who could not be with us this day being ill, but we found him at cards, and here we sat late, talking with my Lady and others and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Whistler,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-920" id="noteref-920" epub:type="noteref">920</a> who I found good company and a very ingenious man. So home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1661-02-15">
				<p><time datetime="1661-02-15">5th</time>. Washing-day. My wife and I by water to Westminster. She to her mother’s and I to Westminster Hall, where I found a full term, and here I went to Will’s, and there found Shaw and Ashwell and another Bragrave (who knew my mother wash-maid to my Lady Veere), who by cursing and swearing made me weary of his company and so I went away. Into the Hall and there saw my Lord Treasurer<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-921" id="noteref-921" epub:type="noteref">921</a> (who was sworn today at the Exchequer, with a great company of Lords and persons of honour to attend him) go up to the Treasury Offices, and take possession thereof; and also saw the heads of Cromwell, Bradshaw, and Ireton, set up upon the further end of the Hall. Then at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Michell’s in the Hall met my wife and Shaw, and she and I and Captain Murford to the Dog, and there I gave them some wine, and after some mirth and talk (<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Langley coming in afterwards) I went by coach to the playhouse at the Theatre, our coach in King Street breaking, and so took another. Here we saw <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Argalus and Parthenia</i>, which I lately saw, but though pleasant for the dancing and singing, I do not find good for any wit or design therein. That done home by coach and to supper, being very hungry for want of dinner, and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1661-02-16">
				<p><time datetime="1661-02-16">6th</time>. Called up by my Cozen Snow, who sat by me while I was trimmed, and then I drank with him, he desiring a courtesy for a friend, which I have done for him. Then to the office, and there sat long, then to dinner, Captain Murford with me. I had a dish of fish and a good hare, which was sent me the other day by Goodenough the plasterer. So to the office again, where Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen and I sat all alone, answering of petitions and nothing else, and so to Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten’s, where comes <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Jessop (one whom I could not formerly have looked upon, and now he comes cap in hand to us from the Commissioners of the Navy, though indeed he is a man of a great estate and of good report), about some business from them to us, which we answered by letter. Here I sat long with Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr>, who is not well, and then home and to my chamber, and some little, music, and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1661-02-17">
				<p><time datetime="1661-02-17">7th</time>. With Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten and Pen to Whitehall to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry’s chamber, to debate upon the business we were upon the other day morning, and thence to Westminster Hall. And after a walk to my Lord’s; where, while I and my Lady were in her chamber in talk, in comes my Lord from sea, to our great wonder. He had dined at Havre de Grace on Monday last, and came to the Downs the next day, and lay at Canterbury that night; and so to Dartford, and thence this morning to White Hall. All my friends his servants well. Among others, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed and Captain Ferrers tell me the stories of my Lord Duke of Buckingham’s and my Lord’s falling out at Havre de Grace, at cards; they two and my Lord <abbr>St.</abbr> Alban’s playing. The Duke did, to my Lord’s dishonour, often say that he did in his conscience know the contrary to what he then said, about the difference at cards; and so did take up the money that he should have lost to my Lord. Which my Lord resenting, said nothing then, but that he doubted not but there were ways enough to get his money of him. So they parted that night; and my Lord sent for Sir <abbr class="name">R.</abbr> Stayner and sent him the next morning to the Duke, to know whether he did remember what he said last night, and whether he would own it with his sword and a second; which he said he would, and so both sides agreed. But my Lord <abbr>St.</abbr> Alban’s, and the Queen and Ambassador Montagu, did waylay them at their lodgings till the difference was made up, to my Lord’s honour; who hath got great reputation thereby. I dined with my Lord, and then with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shepley and Creed (who talked very high of France for a fine country) to the tavern, and then I home. To the office, where the two Sir Williams had staid for me, and then we drew up a letter to the Commissioners of Parliament again, and so to Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten, where I staid late in talk, and so home, and after writing the letter fair then I went to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1661-02-18">
				<p><time datetime="1661-02-18">8th</time>. At the office all the morning. At noon to the Exchange to meet <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Warren the timber merchant, but could not meet with him. Here I met with many sea commanders, and among others Captain Cuttle,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-922" id="noteref-922" epub:type="noteref">922</a> and Curtis, and Mootham,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-923" id="noteref-923" epub:type="noteref">923</a> and I, went to the Fleece Tavern to drink; and there we spent till four o’clock, telling stories of Algiers, and the manner of the life of slaves there.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-924" id="noteref-924" epub:type="noteref">924</a> And truly <abbr>Captn.</abbr> Mootham and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dawes<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-925" id="noteref-925" epub:type="noteref">925</a> (who have been both slaves there) did make me fully acquainted with their condition there: as, how they eat nothing but bread and water. At their redemption they pay so much for the water they drink at the public fountaynes, during their being slaves. How they are beat upon the soles of their feet and bellies at the liberty of their padron. How they are all, at night, called into their master’s Bagnard;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-926" id="noteref-926" epub:type="noteref">926</a> and there they lie. How the poorest men do use their slaves best. How some rogues do live well, if they do invent to bring their masters in so much a week by their industry or theft; and then they are put to no other work at all. And theft there is counted no great crime at all. Thence to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rawlinson’s, having met my old friend Dick Scobell, and there I drank a great deal with him, and so home and to bed betimes, my head aching.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1661-02-19">
				<p><time datetime="1661-02-19">9th</time>. To my Lord’s with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed (who was come to me this morning to get a bill of imprest signed), and my Lord being gone out he and I to the Rhenish wine-house with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blackburne. To whom I did make known my fears of Will’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-927" id="noteref-927" epub:type="noteref">927</a> losing of his time, which he will take care to give him good advice about. Afterwards to my Lord’s and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shepley and I did make even his accounts and mine. And then with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed and two friends of his (my late landlord Jones’ son one of them), to an ordinary to dinner, and then Creed and I to Whitefriars<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-928" id="noteref-928" epub:type="noteref">928</a> to the Playhouse, and saw <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Mad Lover</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-929" id="noteref-929" epub:type="noteref">929</a> the first time I ever saw it acted, which I like pretty well, and home.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1661-02-20">
				<p><time datetime="1661-02-20">10th (Lord’s day)</time>. Took physique all day, and, God forgive me, did spend it in reading of some little French romances. At night my wife and I did please ourselves talking of our going into France, which I hope to effect this summer. At noon one came to ask for <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hunt that was here yesterday, and it seems is not come home yet, which makes us afraid of her. At night to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1661-02-21">
				<p><time datetime="1661-02-21">11th</time>. At the office all the morning. Dined at home, and then to the Exchequer, and took <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Warren with me to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Kennard, the master joiner, at Whitehall, who was at a tavern, and there he and I to him, and agreed about getting some of my Lord’s deals on board tomorrow. Then with young <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Reeve home to his house, who did there show me many pretty pleasures in perspectives,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-930" id="noteref-930" epub:type="noteref">930</a> that I have not seen before, and I did buy a little glass of him cost me 5<abbr class="currency eoc">s.</abbr> And so to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s, and with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore to see how my father and mother did, and so with him to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Adam Chard’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-931" id="noteref-931" epub:type="noteref">931</a> (the first time I ever was at his house since he was married) to drink, then we parted, and I home to my study, and set some papers and money in order, and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1661-02-22">
				<p><time datetime="1661-02-22">12th</time>. To my Lord’s, and there with him all the morning, and then (he going out to dinner) I and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pickering, Creed, and Captain Ferrers to the Leg in the Palace to dinner, where strange Pickering’s impertinences. Thence the two others and I after a great dispute whither to go, we went by water to Salsbury Court<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-932" id="noteref-932" epub:type="noteref">932</a> playhouse, where not liking to sit, we went out again, and by coach to the Theatre, and there saw <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Scornfull Lady</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-933" id="noteref-933" epub:type="noteref">933</a> now done by a woman,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-934" id="noteref-934" epub:type="noteref">934</a> which makes the play appear much better than ever it did to me. Then Creed and I (the other being lost in the crowd) to drink a cup of ale at Temple Bar, and there we parted, and I (seeing my father and mother by the way) went home.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1661-02-23">
				<p><time datetime="1661-02-23">13th</time>. At the office all the morning; dined at home, and poor <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wood with me, who after dinner would have borrowed money of me, but I would lend none. Then to Whitehall by coach with Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen, where we did very little business, and so back to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rawlinson’s, where I took him and gave him a cup of wine, he having formerly known <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rawlinson, and here I met my uncle Wight, and he drank with us, and with him to Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten’s, whither I sent for my wife, and we chose Valentines<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-935" id="noteref-935" epub:type="noteref">935</a> against tomorrow. My wife chose me, which did much please me; my Lady Batten Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> Here we sat late, and so home to bed, having got my Lady Batten to give me a spoonful of honey for my cold.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1661-02-24">
				<p><time datetime="1661-02-24">14th (Valentine’s day)</time>. Up early and to Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten’s, but would not go in till I asked whether they that opened the door was a man or a woman, and Mingo, who was there, answered a woman, which, with his tone, made me laugh; so up I went and took <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Martha<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-936" id="noteref-936" epub:type="noteref">936</a> for my Valentine (which I do only for complacency), and Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten he go in the same manner to my wife, and so we were very merry. About 10 o’clock we, with a great deal of company, went down by our barge to Deptford, and there only went to see how forward <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pett’s yacht is; and so all into the barge again, and so to Woolwich, on board the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Rose-bush</i>, Captain Brown’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-937" id="noteref-937" epub:type="noteref">937</a> ship, that is brother-in-law to Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten, where we had a very fine dinner, dressed on shore, and great mirth and all things successfull; the first time I ever carried my wife a-ship-board, as also my boy Wayneman, who hath all this day been called young Pepys, as Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen’s boy young Pen. So home by barge again; good weather, but pretty cold. I to my study, and began to make up my accounts for my Lord, which I intend to end tomorrow. To bed. The talk of the town now is, who the King is like to have for his Queen: and whether Lent shall be kept with the strictness of the King’s proclamation;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-938" id="noteref-938" epub:type="noteref">938</a> which it is thought cannot be, because of the poor, who cannot buy fish. And also the great preparation for the King’s crowning is now much thought upon and talked of.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1661-02-25">
				<p><time datetime="1661-02-25">15th</time>. At the office all the morning, and in the afternoon at making up my accounts for my Lord tomorrow; and that being done I found myself to be clear (as I think) £350 in the world, besides my goods in my house and all things paid for.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1661-02-26">
				<p><time datetime="1661-02-26">16th</time>. To my Lord in the morning, who looked over my accounts and agreed to them. I did also get him to sign a bill (which do make my heart merry) for £60 to me, in consideration of my work extraordinary at sea this last voyage, which I hope to get paid. I dined with my Lord and then to the Theatre, where I saw <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Virgin Martyr</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-939" id="noteref-939" epub:type="noteref">939</a> a good but too sober a play for the company. Then home.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1661-02-27">
				<p><time datetime="1661-02-27">17th (Lord’s day)</time>. A most tedious, unreasonable, and impertinent sermon, by an Irish Doctor. His text was “Scatter them, O Lord, that delight in war.” Sir <abbr class="name">Wm.</abbr> Batten and I very much angry with the parson. And so I to Westminster as soon as I came home to my Lord’s, where I dined with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shepley and Howe. After dinner (without speaking to my Lord), <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shepley and I into the city, and so I home and took my wife to my uncle Wight’s, and there did sup with them, and so home again and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1661-02-28">
				<p><time datetime="1661-02-28">18th</time>. At the office all the morning, dined at home with a very good dinner, only my wife and I, which is not yet very usual. In the afternoon my wife and I and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Martha Batten, my Valentine, to the Exchange, and there upon a payre of embroydered and six payre of plain white gloves I laid out 40<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> upon her. Then we went to a mercer’s at the end of Lombard Street, and there she bought a suit of Lutestring<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-940" id="noteref-940" epub:type="noteref">940</a> for herself, and so home. And at night I got the whole company and Sir <abbr class="name">Wm.</abbr> Pen home to my house, and there I did give them Rhenish wine and sugar, and continued together till it was late, and so to bed. It is much talked that the King is already married to the niece of the Prince de Ligne,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-941" id="noteref-941" epub:type="noteref">941</a> and that he hath two sons already by her: which I am sorry to hear; but yet am gladder that it should be so, than that the Duke of York and his family should come to the crown, he being a professed friend to the Catholiques.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1661-03-01">
				<p><time datetime="1661-03-01">19th</time>. By coach to Whitehall with Colonel Slingsby (carrying <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Turner with us) and there he and I up into the house, where we met with Sir <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Carteret: who afterwards, with the Duke of York, my Lord Sandwich, and others, went into a private room to consult: and we were a little troubled that we were not called in with the rest. But I do believe it was upon something very private. We staid walking in the gallery; where we met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Slingsby,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-942" id="noteref-942" epub:type="noteref">942</a> that was formerly a great friend of <abbr>Mons.</abbr> Blondeau, who showed me the stamps of the King’s new coyne; which is strange to see, how good they are in the stamp and bad in the money, for lack of skill to make them. But he says Blondeau will shortly come over, and then we shall have it better, and the best in the world.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-943" id="noteref-943" epub:type="noteref">943</a> The Comptroller and I to the Commissioners of Parliament, and after some talk away again and to drink a cup of ale. He tells me, he is sure that the King is not yet married, as it is said; nor that it is known who he will have. To my Lord’s and found him dined, and so I lost my dinner, but I staid and played with him and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Child, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, some things of four parts, and so it raining hard and bitter cold (the first winter day we have yet had this winter), I took coach home and spent the evening in reading of a Latin play, the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play" xml:lang="la">Naufragium Joculare</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-944" id="noteref-944" epub:type="noteref">944</a> And so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1661-03-02">
				<p><time datetime="1661-03-02">20th</time>. All the morning at the office, dined at home and my brother Tom with me, who brought me a pair of fine slippers which he gave me. By and by comes little Luellin and friend to see me, and then my coz Stradwick, who was never here before. With them I drank a bottle of wine or two, and to the office again, and there staid about business late, and then all of us to Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen’s, where we had, and my Lady Batten, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Martha, and my wife, and other company, a good supper, and sat playing at cards and talking till 12 at night, and so all to our lodgings.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1661-03-03">
				<p><time datetime="1661-03-03">21st</time>. To Westminster by coach with Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen, and in our way saw the city begin to build scaffolds against the Coronacion. To my Lord, and there found him out of doors. So to the Hall and called for some caps that I have a making there, and here met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hawley, and with him to Will’s and drank, and then by coach with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Langley our old friend into the city. I set him down by the way, and I home and there staid all day within, having found <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore, who staid with me till late at night talking and reading some good books. Then he went away, and I to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1661-03-04">
				<p><time datetime="1661-03-04">22nd</time>. All the morning at the office. At noon with my wife and Pall to my father’s to dinner, where <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">Thos.</abbr> Pepys and my coz Snow and Joyce Norton. After dinner came <abbr class="name">The.</abbr> Turner, and so I home with her to her mother, good woman, whom I had not seen through my great neglect this half year, but she would not be angry with me. Here I staid all the afternoon talking of the King’s being married, which is now the town talk, but I believe false. In the evening <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <abbr class="name">The.</abbr> and Joyce took us all into the coach home, calling in Bishopsgate Street, thinking to have seen a new Harpsicon<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-945" id="noteref-945" epub:type="noteref">945</a> that she had a making there, but it was not done, and so we did not see it. Then to my home, where I made very much of her, and then she went home. Then my wife to Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten’s, and there sat a while; he having yesterday sent my wife half-a-dozen pairs of gloves, and a pair of silk stockings and garters, for her Valentine’s gift. Then home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1661-03-05">
				<p><time datetime="1661-03-05">23rd</time>. This my birthday, 28 years. This morning Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten, Pen, and I did some business, and then I by water to Whitehall, having met <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hartlibb<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-946" id="noteref-946" epub:type="noteref">946</a> by the way at Alderman Backwell’s. So he did give me a glass of Rhenish wine at the Steeleyard,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-947" id="noteref-947" epub:type="noteref">947</a> and so to Whitehall by water. He continues of the same bold impertinent humour that he was always of and will ever be. He told me how my Lord Chancellor had lately got the Duke of York and Duchess, and her woman, my Lord Ossory,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-948" id="noteref-948" epub:type="noteref">948</a> and a Doctor, to make oath before most of the judges of the kingdom, concerning all the circumstances of their marriage. And in fine, it is confessed that they were not fully married till about a month or two before she was brought to bed; but that they were contracted long before, and time enough for the child to be legitimate.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-949" id="noteref-949" epub:type="noteref">949</a> But I do not hear that it was put to the judges to determine whether it was so or no. To my Lord and there spoke to him about his opinion of the Light, the sea-mark that Captain Murford is about, and do offer me an eighth part to concern myself with it, and my Lord do give me some encouragement in it, and I shall go on. I dined herewith <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shepley and Howe. After dinner to Whitehall Chappell with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Child, and there did hear Captain Cooke and his boy make a trial of an Anthem against tomorrow, which was brave musique. Then by water to Whitefriars to the Playhouse, and there saw <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Changeling</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-950" id="noteref-950" epub:type="noteref">950</a> the first time it hath been acted these twenty years, and it takes exceedingly. Besides, I see the gallants do begin to be tyred with the vanity and pride of the theatre actors who are indeed grown very proud and rich. Then by link home, and there to my book awhile and to bed. I met today with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Townsend, who tells me that the old man is yet alive in whose place in the Wardrobe he hopes to get my father, which I do resolve to put for. I also met with the Comptroller, who told me how it was easy for us all, the principal officers, and proper for us, to labour to get into the next Parliament; and would have me to ask the Duke’s letter,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-951" id="noteref-951" epub:type="noteref">951</a> but I shall not endeavour it because it will spend much money, though I am sure I could well obtain it. This is now 28 years that I am born. And blessed be God, in a state of full content, and great hopes to be a happy man in all respects, both to myself and friends.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1661-03-06">
				<p><time datetime="1661-03-06">24th (Sunday)</time>. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mills made as excellent a sermon in the morning against drunkenness as ever I heard in my life. I dined at home; another good one of his in the afternoon. My Valentine had her fine gloves on at church today that I did give her. After sermon my wife and I unto Sir <abbr class="name">Wm.</abbr> Batten and sat awhile. Then home, I to read, then to supper and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1661-03-07">
				<p><time datetime="1661-03-07">25th</time>. Sir <abbr class="name">Wm.</abbr> Pen and I to my Lord Sandwich’s by coach in the morning to see him, but he takes physic today and so we could not see him. So he went away, and I with Luellin to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mount’s chamber at the Cockpit, where he did lie of old, and there we drank, and from thence to <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Symons where we found him abroad, but she, like a good lady, within, and there we did eat some nettle porrige, which was made on purpose today for some of their coming, and was very good. With her we sat a good while, merry in discourse, and so away, Luellin and I to my Lord’s, and there dined. He told me one of the prettiest stories, how <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blurton, his friend that was with him at my house three or four days ago, did go with him the same day from my house to the Fleet tavern by Guildhall, and there (by some pretence) got the mistress of the house into their company, and by and by Luellin calling him Doctor she thought that he really was so, and did privately discover her disease to him, which was only some ordinary infirmity belonging to women, and he proffering her physic, she desired him to come some day and bring it, which he did. After dinner by water to the office, and there Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen and I met and did business all the afternoon, and then I got him to my house and eat a lobster together, and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1661-03-08">
				<p><time datetime="1661-03-08">26th (Shrove Tuesday)</time>. I left my wife in bed, being indisposed … I to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Turner’s, who I found busy with <abbr class="name">The.</abbr> and Joyce making of things ready for fritters, so to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s and there delivered <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Cotgrave’s Dictionary</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-952" id="noteref-952" epub:type="noteref">952</a> to my Lady Jemimah, and then with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore to my coz Tom Pepys, but he being out of town I spoke with his lady, though not of the business I went about, which was to borrow £1,000 for my Lord. Back to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Turner’s, where several friends, all strangers to me but <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Armiger, dined. Very merry and the best fritters that ever I eat in my life. After that looked out at window; saw the flinging at cocks.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-953" id="noteref-953" epub:type="noteref">953</a> Then <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <abbr class="name">The.</abbr> and I, and a gentleman that dined there and his daughter, a perfect handsome young and very tall lady that lately came out of the country, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thatcher the Virginall Maister to Bishopsgate Street, and there saw the new Harpsicon made for <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <abbr class="name">The.</abbr> We offered £12, they demanded £14. The Master not being at home, we could make no bargain, so parted for tonight. So all by coach to my house, where I found my Valentine with my wife, and here they drank, and then went away. Then I sat and talked with my Valentine and my wife a good while, and then saw her home, and went to Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten to the Dolphin, where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Newborne, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, were, and there after a quart or two of wine, we home, and I to bed. …</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1661-03-09">
				<p><time datetime="1661-03-09">27th</time>. At the office all the morning, that done I walked in the garden with little Captain Murford, where he and I had some discourse concerning the Lighthouse again, and I think I shall appear in the business, he promising me that if I can bring it about, it will be worth £100 per annum. Then came into the garden to me young <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Powell and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hooke that I once knew at Cambridge, and I took them in and gave them a bottle of wine, and so parted. Then I called for a dish of fish, which we had for dinner, this being the first day of Lent; and I do intend to try whether I can keep it or no. My father dined with me and did show me a letter from my brother John, wherein he tells us that he is chosen Schollar of the house,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-954" id="noteref-954" epub:type="noteref">954</a> which do please me much, because I do perceive now it must chiefly come from his merit and not the power of his Tutor, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Widdrington, who is now quite out of interest there and hath put over his pupils to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pepper, a young Fellow of the College. With my father to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rawlinson’s, where we met my uncle Wight, and after a pint or two away. I walked with my father (who gave me an account of the great falling out between my uncle Fenner and his son Will)<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-955" id="noteref-955" epub:type="noteref">955</a> as far as Paul’s Churchyard, and so left him, and I home. This day the Commissioners of Parliament begin to pay off the Fleet, beginning with the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Hampshire</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-956" id="noteref-956" epub:type="noteref">956</a> and do it at Guildhall, for fear of going out of town into the power of the seamen, who are highly incensed against them.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry" id="entry-1661-03-10">
				<p><time datetime="1661-03-10">28th</time>. Early to wait on my Lord, and after a little talk with him I took boat at Whitehall for Redriffe, but in my way overtook Captain Cuttance and Teddiman in a boat and so ashore with them at Queenhithe, and so to a tavern with them to a barrel of oysters, and so away. <abbr>Capt.</abbr> Cuttance and I walked from Redriffe to Deptford, where I found both Sir Williams and Sir <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Carteret at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Uthwayt’s, and there we dined, and notwithstanding my resolution, yet for want of other victualls, I did eat flesh this Lent, but am resolved to eat as little as I can. After dinner we went to Captain Bodilaw’s, and there made sale of many old stores by the candle, and good sport it was to see how from a small matter bid at first they would come to double and treble the price of things. After that Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen and I and my Lady Batten and her daughter by land to Redriffe, staying a little at halfway house, and when we came to take boat, found Sir George, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, to have staid with the barge a great while for us, which troubled us. Home and to bed. This month ends with two great secrets under dispute but yet known to very few: first, Who the King will marry; and What the meaning of this fleet is which we are now sheathing to set out for the southward. Most think against Algier against the Turk, or to the East Indys against the Dutch who, we hear, are setting out a great fleet thither.</p>
			</article>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
