<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>November 1661</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-23" epub:type="chapter z3998:diary">
			<h2 epub:type="title">November 1661</h2>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-11-1">November 1st</time>. I went this morning with Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen by coach to Westminster, and having done my business at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Montagu’s, I went back to him at Whitehall, and from thence with him to the 3 Tun Tavern, at Charing Cross, and there sent for up the maister of the house’s dinner, and dined very well upon it, and afterwards had him and his fayre sister (who is very great with Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten and Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen in mirth) up to us, and looked over some medals that they showed us of theirs; and so went away to the Theatre, to <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Joviall Crew</i>, and from hence home, and at my house we were very merry till late, having sent for his son, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> William Pen,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-554" id="noteref-554" epub:type="noteref">554</a> lately come from Oxford. And after supper parted, and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-11-2">2nd</time>. At the office all the morning; where Sir John Minnes, our new comptroller, was fetched by Sir <abbr class="name">Wm.</abbr> Pen and myself from Sir <abbr class="name">Wm.</abbr> Batten’s, and led to his place in the office. The first time that he had come hither, and he seems a good fair condition man, and one that I am glad hath the office. After the office done, I to the Wardrobe, and there dined, and in the afternoon had an hour or two’s talk with my Lady with great pleasure. And so with the two young ladies by coach to my house, and gave them some entertainment, and so late at night sent them home with Captain Ferrers by coach. This night my boy Wayneman, as I was in my chamber, I overheard him let off some gunpowder; and hearing my wife chide him below for it, and a noise made, I call him up, and find that it was powder that he had put in his pocket, and a match carelessly with it, thinking that it was out, and so the match did give fire to the powder, and had burnt his side and his hand that he put into his pocket to put out the fire. But upon examination, and finding him in a lie about the time and place that he bought it, I did extremely beat him, and though it did trouble me to do it, yet I thought it necessary to do it. So to write by the post, and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-11-3">3rd (Lord’s day)</time>. This day I stirred not out, but took physique, and it did work very well, and all the day as I was at leisure I did read in Fuller’s Holy Warr, which I have of late bought, and did try to make a song in the praise of a liberall genius (as I take my own to be) to all studies and pleasures, but it not proving to my mind I did reject it and so proceeded not in it. At night my wife and I had a good supper by ourselves of a pullet hashed, which pleased me much to see my condition come to allow ourselves a dish like that, and so at night to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-11-4">4th</time>. In the morning, being very rainy, by coach with Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen and my wife to Whitehall, and sent her to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bunt’s, and he and I to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry’s about business, and so sent for her again, and all three home again, only I to the Mitre (<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rawlinson’s), where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierce, the Purser, had got us a most brave chine of beef, and a dish of marrowbones. Our company my uncle Wight, Captain Lambert, one Captain Davies, and purser Barter, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rawlinson, and ourselves; and very merry. After dinner I took coach, and called my wife at my brother’s, where I left her, and to the Opera, where we saw <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Bondman</i>, which of old we both did so dote on, and do still; though to both our thinking not so well acted here (having too great expectations), as formerly at Salisbury-court. But for Betterton he is called by us both the best actor in the world. So home by coach, I lighting by the way at my uncle Wight’s and staid there a little, and so home after my wife, and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-11-5">5th</time>. At the office all the morning. At noon comes my brother Tom and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Armiger to dine with me, and did, and we were very merry. After dinner, I having drunk a great deal of wine, I went away, seeming to go about business with Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen, to my Lady Batten’s (Sir William being at Chatham), and there sat a good while, and then went away (before I went I called at home to see whether they were gone, and found them there, and Armiger inviting my wife to go to a play, and like a fool would be courting her, but he is an ass, and lays out money with Tom, otherwise I should not think him worth half this respect I show him). To the Dolphin, where he and I and Captain Cocke sat late and drank much, seeing the boys in the streets flying their crackers, this day being kept all the day very strictly in the City. At last broke up, and called at my Lady Batten’s again and would have gone to cards, but Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen was so fuddled that we could not try him to play, and therefore we parted, and I home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-11-6">6th</time>. Going forth this morning I met <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Davenport and a friend of his, one <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Furbisher, to drink their morning draft with me, and I did give it them in good wine, and anchovies, and pickled oysters, and took them to the Sun in Fish Street, there did give them a barrel of good ones, and a great deal of wine, and sent for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Bernard (Sir Robert’s son), a grocer thereabouts, and were very merry, and cost me a good deal of money, and at noon left them, and with my head full of wine, and being invited by a note from Luellin, that came to my hands this morning in bed, I went to Nick Osborne’s at the Victualling Office, and there saw his wife, who he has lately married, a good sober woman, and new come to their home. We had a good dish or two of marrowbones and another of neat’s tongues to dinner, and that being done I bade them adieu and hastened to Whitehall (calling <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore by the way) to my Lord Privy Seal, who will at last force the clerks to bring in a table of their fees, which they have so long denied, but I do not join with them, and so he is very respectful to me. So he desires me to bring in one which I observe in making of fees, which I will speedily do. So back again, and endeavoured to speak with Tom Trice (who I fear is hatching some mischief), but could not, which vexed me, and so I went home and sat late with pleasure at my lute, and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-11-7">7th</time>. This morning came one <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hill (sent by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hunt, the Instrument maker), to teach me to play on the Theorbo, but I do not like his play nor singing, and so I found a way to put him off. So to the office. And then to dinner, and got <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pett the Commissioner to dinner with me, he and I alone, my wife not being well, and so after dinner parted. And I to Tom Trice, who in short showed me a writt he had ready for my father, and I promised to answer it. So I went to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Williams (who is now pretty well got up after his sickness), and after that to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore to advise, and so returned home late on foot, with my mind cleared, though not satisfied. I met with letters at home from my Lord from Lisbone, which speak of his being well; and he tells me he had seen at the court there the day before he wrote this letter, the Juego de Toro.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-555" id="noteref-555" epub:type="noteref">555</a> So fitted myself for bed. Coming home I called at my uncle Fenner’s, who tells that Peg Kite now hath declared she will have the beggarly rogue the weaver, and so we are resolved neither to meddle nor make with her.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-11-8">8th</time>. This morning up early, and to my Lord Chancellor’s with a letter to him from my Lord, and did speak with him; and he did ask me whether I was son to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Talbot Pepys or no (with whom he was once acquainted in the Court of Requests), and spoke to me with great respect. Thence to Westminster Hall (it being Term time) and there met with Commissioner Pett, and so at noon he and I by appointment to the Sun in New Fish Street, where Sir <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Minnes, Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten, and we all were to dine, at an invitation of Captain Stoaks and Captain Clerk, and were very merry, and by discourse I found Sir <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Minnes a fine gentleman and a very good scholler. After dinner to the Wardrobe, and thence to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Williams, who went with me (the first time that he has been abroad a great while) to the Six Clerks Office to find me a clerk there able to advise me in my business with Tom Trice, and after I had heard them talk, and had given me some comfort, I went to my brother Tom’s, and took him with me to my <abbr>coz.</abbr> Turner at the Temple, and had his opinion that I should not pay more than the principal £200, with which I was much pleased, and so home.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-11-9">9th</time>. At the office all the morning. At noon <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Davenport, Phillips, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">Wm.</abbr> Bernard and Furbisher, came by appointment and dined with me, and we were very merry. After dinner I to the Wardrobe, and there staid talking with my Lady all the afternoon till late at night. Among other things my Lady did mightily urge me to lay out money upon my wife, which I perceived was a little more earnest than ordinary, and so I seemed to be pleased with it, and do resolve to bestow a lace upon her, and what with this and other talk, we were exceeding merry. So home at night.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-11-10">10th (Lord’s day)</time>. At our own church in the morning, where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mills preached. Thence alone to the Wardrobe to dinner with my Lady, where my Lady continues upon yesterday’s discourse still for me to lay out money upon my wife, which I think it is best for me to do for her honour and my own. Last night died Archibald, my Lady’s butler and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Sarah’s brother, of a dropsy, which I am troubled at. In the afternoon went and sat with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turner in his pew at <abbr>St.</abbr> Gregory’s, where I hear our Queen Katherine, the first time by name as such, publickly prayed for, and heard <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Buck upon “Woe unto thee, Corazin,” <abbr>etc.</abbr>, where he started a difficulty, which he left to another time to answer, about why God should give means of grace to those people which he knew would not receive them, and deny to others which he himself confesses, if they had had them, would have received them, and they would have been effectual too. I would I could hear him explain this, when he do come to it. Thence home to my wife, and took her to my Aunt Wight’s, and there sat a while with her (my uncle being at Katharine hill), and so home, and I to Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten’s, where Captain Cock was, and we sent for two bottles of Canary to the Rose, which did do me a great deal of hurt, and did trouble me all night, and, indeed, came home so out of order that I was loth to say prayers tonight as I am used ever to do on Sundays, which my wife took notice of and people of the house, which I was sorry for.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-11-11">11th</time>. To the Wardrobe, and with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Townsend and Moore to the Saracen’s Head to a barrel of oysters, and so <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore and I to Tom Trice’s, with whom I did first set my hand to answer to a writt of his this tearm. Thence to the Wardrobe to dinner, and there by appointment met my wife, who had by my direction brought some laces for my Lady to choose one for her. And after dinner I went away, and left my wife and ladies together, and all their work was about this lace of hers. Captain Ferrers and I went together, and he carried me the first time that ever I saw any gaming house, to one, entering into Lincoln’s-Inn-Fields, at the end of Bell Yard, where strange the folly of men to lay and lose so much money, and very glad I was to see the manner of a gamester’s life, which I see is very miserable, and poor, and unmanly. And thence he took me to a dancing school in Fleet Street, where we saw a company of pretty girls dance, but I do not in myself like to have young girls exposed to so much vanity. So to the Wardrobe, where I found my Lady had agreed upon a lace for my wife of £6, which I seemed much glad of that it was no more, though in my mind I think it too much, and I pray God keep me so to order myself and my wife’s expenses that no inconvenience in purse or honour follow this my prodigality. So by coach home.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-11-12">12th</time>. At the office all the morning. Dined at home alone. So abroad with Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen. My wife and I to <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Bartholomew Fayre</i>, with puppets which I had seen once before, and Ate play without puppets often, but though I love the play as much as ever I did, yet I do not like the puppets at all, but think it to be a lessening to it. Thence to the Greyhound in Fleet Street, and there drank some raspberry sack and eat some sasages, and so home very merry. This day Holmes come to town; and we do expect hourly to hear what usage he hath from the Duke and the King about this late business of letting the Swedish Embassador go by him without striking his flag.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-556" id="noteref-556" epub:type="noteref">556</a></p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-11-13">13th</time>. By appointment, we all went this morning to wait upon the Duke of York, which we did in his chamber, as he was dressing himself in his riding suit to go this day by sea to the Downs. He is in mourning for his wife’s grandmother, which is thought a great piece of fondness.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-557" id="noteref-557" epub:type="noteref">557</a> After we had given him our letter relating the bad condition of the Navy for want of money, he referred it to his coming back and so parted, and I to Whitehall and to see la belle Pierce, and so on foot to my Lord Crew’s, where I found him come to his new house, which is next to that he lived in last; here I was well received by my Lord and Sir Thomas, with whom I had great talk: and he tells me in good earnest that he do believe the Parliament (which comes to sit again the next week), will be troublesome to the Court and Clergy, which God forbid! But they see things carried so by my Lord Chancellor and some others, that get money themselves, that they will not endure it. From thence to the Theatre, and there saw <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Father’s own Son</i> again, and so it raining very hard I went home by coach, with my mind very heavy for this my expensefull life, which will undo me, I fear, after all my hopes, if I do not take up, for now I am coming to lay out a great deal of money in clothes for my wife, I must forbear other expenses. To bed, and this night began to lie in the little green chamber, where the maids lie, but we could not a great while get Nell to lie there, because I lie there and my wife, but at last, when she saw she must lie there or sit up, she, with much ado, came to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-11-4">4th</time>. At the office all the morning. At noon I went by appointment to the Sun in Fish Street to a dinner of young <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bernard’s for myself, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Phillips, Davenport, Weaver, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, where we had a most excellent dinner, but a pie of such pleasant variety of good things, as in all my life I never tasted. Hither came to me Captain Lambert to take his leave of me, he being this day to set sail for the Straights. We drank his farewell and a health to all our friends, and were very merry, and drank wine enough. Hence to the Temple to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turner about drawing up my bill in Chancery against <abbr class="name">T.</abbr> Trice, and so to Salisbury Court, where <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Turner is come to town tonight, but very ill still of an ague, which I was sorry to see. So to the Wardrobe and talked with my Lady, and so home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-11-15">15th</time>. At home all the morning, and at noon with my wife to the Wardrobe to dinner, and there, did show herself to my Lady in the handkercher that she bought the lace for the other day, and indeed it is very handsome. Here I left my wife and went to my Lord Privy Seal to Whitehall, and there did give him a copy of the Fees of the office as I have received them, and he was well pleased with it. So to the Opera, where I met my wife and Captain Ferrers and Madamoiselle Le Blanc, and there did see the second part of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Siege of Rhodes</i> very well done; and so by coach set her home, and the coach driving down the hill through Thames Street, which I think never any coach did before from that place to the bridge-foot, but going up Fish Street Hill his horses were so tired, that they could not be got to go up the hill, though all the street boys and men did beat and whip them. At last I was fain to send my boy for a link, and so light out of the coach till we got to another at the corner of Fenchurch Street, and so home, and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-11-16">16th</time>. At the office all the morning. Dined at home, and so about my business in the afternoon to the Temple, where I found my Chancery bill drawn against <abbr class="name">T.</abbr> Trice, which I read and like it, and so home.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-11-17">17th (Lord’s day)</time>. To our own church, and at noon, by invitation, Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen dined with me, and I took <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hester, my Lady Batten’s kinswoman, to dinner from church with me, and we were very merry. So to church again, and heard a simple fellow upon the praise of Church musique, and exclaiming against men’s wearing their hats on in the church, but I slept part of the sermon, till latter prayer and blessing and all was done without waking which I never did in my life. So home, and by and by comes my uncle Wight and my aunt and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Norbury and his lady, and we drank hard and were very merry till supper time, and then we parted, my wife and I being invited to Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen’s, where we also were very merry, and so home to prayers and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-11-18">18th</time>. By coach with Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen; my wife and I toward Westminster, but seeing <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore in the street I light and he and I went to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Battersby’s the minister, in my way I putting in at <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul’s, where I saw the quiristers in their surplices going to prayers, and a few idle poor people and boys to hear them, which is the first time I have seen them, and am sorry to see things done so out of order, and there I received £50 more, which make up £100 that I now have borrowed of him, and so I did burn the old bond for £50, and paying him the use of it did make a new bond for the whole £100. Here I dined and had a good dinner, and his wife a good pretty woman. There was a young Parson at the table that had got himself drunk before dinner, which troubled me to see. After dinner to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bowers at Westminster for my wife, and brought her to the Theatre to see <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Philaster</i>, which I never saw before, but I found it far short of my expectations. So by coach home.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-11-19">19th</time>. At the office all the morning, and coming home found <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hunt with my wife in the chamber alone, which God forgive me did trouble my head, but remembering that it was washing and that there was no place else with a fire for him to be in, it being also cold weather, I was at ease again. He dined with us, and after dinner took coach and carried him with us as far as my cozen Scott’s, where we set him down and parted, and my wife and I staid there at the christening of my cozens boy, where my cozen Samuel Pepys, of Ireland, and I were godfathers, and I did name the child Samuel. There was a company of pretty women there in the chamber, but we staid not, but went with the minister into another room and eat and drank, and at last, when most of the women were gone, Sam and I went into my cozen Scott, who was got off her bed, and so we staid and talked and were very merry, my she-cozen, Stradwick, being godmother. And then I left my wife to go home by coach, and I walked to the Temple about my law business, and there received a subpoena for <abbr class="name">T.</abbr> Trice. I carried it myself to him at the usual house at Doctors Commons and did give it him, and so home and to bed. It cost me 20<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> between the midwife and the two nurses today.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-11-20">20th</time>. To Westminster Hall by water in the morning, where I saw the King going in his barge to the Parliament House; this being the first day of their meeting again. And the Bishops, I hear, do take their places in the Lords House this day. I walked long in the Hall, but hear nothing of news, but what Ned Pickering tells me, which I am troubled at, that Sir <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Minnes should send word to the King, that if he did not remove all my Lord Sandwich’s captains out of this fleet, he believed the King would not be master of the fleet at its coming again: and so do endeavour to bring disgrace upon my Lord. But I hope all that will not do, for the King loves him. Hence by water to the Wardrobe, and dined with my Lady, my Lady Wright being there too, whom I find to be a witty but very conceited woman and proud. And after dinner <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore and I to the Temple, and there he read my bill and likes it well enough, and so we came back again, he with me as far as the lower end of Cheapside, and there I gave him a pint of sack and parted, and I home, and went seriously to look over my papers touching <abbr class="name">T.</abbr> Trice, and I think I have found some that will go near to do me more good in this difference of ours than all I have before. So to bed with my mind cheery upon it, and lay long reading <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Hobbs his Liberty and Necessity</i>, and a little but very shrewd piece, and so to sleep.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-11-21">21st</time>. In the morning again at looking over my last night’s papers, and by and by comes <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore, who finds that my papers may do me much good. He staid and dined with me, and we had a good surloyne of rost beefe, the first that ever I had of my own buying since I kept house; and after dinner he and I to the Temple, and there showed <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Smallwood my papers, who likes them well, and so I left them with him, and went with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore to Gray’s Inn to his chamber, and there he showed me his old Camden’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Britannica</i>, which I intend to buy of him, and so took it away with me, and left it at <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul’s Churchyard to be bound, and so home and to the office all the afternoon; it being the first afternoon that we have sat, which we are now to do always, so long as the Parliament sits, who this day have voted the King £120,000<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-558" id="noteref-558" epub:type="noteref">558</a> to be raised to pay his debts. And after the office with Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten to the Dolphin, and drank and left him there, and I again to the Temple about my business, and so on foot home again and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-11-22">22nd</time>. Within all the morning, and at noon with my wife, by appointment to dinner at the Dolphin, where Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten, and his lady and daughter Matt, and Captain Cocke and his lady, a German lady, but a very great beauty, and we dined together, at the spending of some wagers won and lost between him and I; and there we had the best musique and very good songs, and were very merry and danced, but I was most of all taken with Madam Cocke and her little boy, which in mirth his father had given to me. But after all our mirth comes a reckoning of £4, besides 40<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> to the musicians, which did trouble us, but it must be paid, and so I took leave and left them there about eight at night. And on foot went to the Temple, and then took my cozen Turner’s man Roger, and went by his advice to Serjeant Fountaine and told him our case, who gives me good comfort in it, and I gave him 30<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> fee. So home again and to bed. This day a good pretty maid was sent my wife by Mary Bowyer, whom my wife has hired.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-11-23">23rd</time>. To Westminster with my wife (she to her father’s), and about 10 o’clock back again home, and there I to the office a little, and thence by coach with Commissioner Pett to Cheapside to one Savill, a painter, who I intend shall do my picture and my wife’s. Thence I to dinner at the Wardrobe, and so home to the office, and there all the afternoon till night, and then both Sir Williams to my house, and in comes Captain Cock, and they to cards. By and by Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten and Cock, after drinking a good deal of wine, went away, and Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen staid with my wife and I to supper, very pleasant, and so good night. This day I have a chine of beef sent home, which I bespoke to send, and did send it as a present to my uncle Wight.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-11-24">24th (Lord’s day)</time>. Up early, and by appointment to <abbr>St.</abbr> Clement Danes to church, and there to meet Captain Cocke, who had often commended <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Alsopp, their minister, to me, who is indeed an able man, but as all things else did not come up to my expectations. His text was that all good and perfect gifts are from above. Thence Cocke and I to the Sun tavern behind the Exchange, and there met with others that are come from the same church, and staid and drank and talked with them a little, and so broke up, and I to the Wardrobe and there dined, and staid all the afternoon with my Lady alone talking, and thence to see Madame Turner, who, poor lady, continues very ill, and I begin to be afraid of her. Thence homewards, and meeting <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Yong, the upholster, he and I to the Mitre, and with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rawlinson sat and drank a quart of sack, and so I to Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten’s and there staid and supped, and so home, where I found an invitation sent my wife and I to my uncle Wight’s on Tuesday next to the chine of beef which I presented them with yesterday. So to prayers and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-11-25">25th</time>. To Westminster Hall in the morning with Captain Lambert, and there he did at the Dog give me and some other friends of his, his foy, he being to set sail today towards the Streights. Here we had oysters and good wine. Having this morning met in the Hall with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sanchy, we appointed to meet at the play this afternoon. At noon, at the rising of the House, I met with Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen and Major General Massy,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-559" id="noteref-559" epub:type="noteref">559</a> who I find by discourse to be a very ingenious man, and among other things a great master in the secrecys of powder and fireworks, and another knight to dinner, at the Swan, in the Palace yard, and our meat brought from the Legg; and after dinner Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen and I to the Theatre, and there saw <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Country Captain</i>, a dull play, and that being done, I left him with his Torys<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-560" id="noteref-560" epub:type="noteref">560</a> and went to the Opera, and saw the last act of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Bondman</i>, and there found <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sanchy and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Mary Archer, sister to the fair Betty, whom I did admire at Cambridge, and thence took them to the Fleece in Covent Garden, there to bid good night to Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen who staid for me; but <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sanchy could not by any argument get his lady to trust herself with him into the tavern, which he was much troubled at, and so we returned immediately into the city by coach, and at the Mitre in Cheapside there light and drank, and then yet her at her uncle’s in the Old Jewry. And so he and I back again thither, and drank till past 12 at night, till I had drank something too much. He all the while telling me his intention to get a girl who is worth £1,000, and many times we had her sister Betty’s health, whose memory I love. At last parted, and I well home, only had got cold and was hoarse and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-11-27">27th</time>. This morning our maid Dorothy and my wife parted, which though she be a wench for her tongue not to be borne with, yet I was loth to part with her, but I took my leave kindly of her and went out to Savill’s, the painter, and there sat the first time for my face with him; thence to dinner with my Lady; and so after an hour or two’s talk in divinity with my Lady, Captain Ferrers and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore and I to the Theatre, and there saw <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Hamlett</i> very well done, and so I home, and found that my wife had been with my aunt Wight and Ferrers to wait on my Lady today this afternoon, and there danced and were very merry, and my Lady very fond as she is always of my wife. So to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-11-28">28th</time>. At home all the morning; at noon Will brought me from Whitehall, whither I had sent him, some letters from my Lord Sandwich, from Tangier; where he continues still, and hath done some execution upon the Turks, and retaken an Englishman from them, of one <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Parker’s, a merchant in Marke-lane. In the afternoon <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pett and I met at the office; there being none more there than we two I saw there was not the reverence due to us observed, and so I took occasion to break up and took <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gawdon along with me, and he and I (though it rained) were resolved to go, he to my Lord Treasurer’s and I to the Chancellor’s with a letter from my Lord today. So to a tavern at the end of Mark Lane, and there we staid till with much ado we got a coach, and so to my Lord Treasurer’s and lost our labours, then to the Chancellor’s, and there met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dugdale, and with him and one <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Simons, I think that belongs to my Lord Hatton, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Kipps and others, to the Fountain tavern, and there staid till twelve at night drinking and singing, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Simons and one <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Agar singing very well. Then <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gawdon being almost drunk had the wit to be gone, and so I took leave too, and it being a fine moonshine night he and I footed it all the way home, but though he was drunk he went such a pace as I did admire how he was able to go. When I came home I found our new maid Sarah<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-561" id="noteref-561" epub:type="noteref">561</a> come, who is a tall and a very well favoured wench, and one that I think will please us. So to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-11-29">29th</time>. I lay long in bed, till Sir Williams both sent me word that we were to wait upon the Duke of York today; and that they would have me to meet them at Westminster Hall, at noon: so I rose and went thither; and there I understand that they are gone to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry’s lodgings, in the Old Palace Yard, to dinner (the first time I knew he had any); and there I met them two and Sir <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Carteret, and had a very fine dinner, and good welcome, and discourse; and so, by water, after dinner to White Hall to the Duke, who met us in his closet; and there he did discourse to us the business of Holmes, and did desire of us to know what hath been the common practice about making of forrayne ships to strike sail to us, which they did all do as much as they could; but I could say nothing to it, which I was sorry for. So indeed I was forced to study a lie, and so after we were gone from the Duke, I told <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry that I had heard <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Selden often say, that he could prove that in Henry the 7th’s time, he did give commission to his captains to make the King of Denmark’s ships to strike to him in the Baltique. From thence Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen and I to the Theatre, but it was so full that we could hardly get any room, so he went up to one of the boxes, and I into the 18<abbr class="currency">d.</abbr> places, and there saw <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Love at first sight</i>, a play of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Killigrew’s, and the first time that it hath been acted since before the troubles, and great expectation there was, but I found the play to be a poor thing, and so I perceive every body else do. So home, calling at Paul’s Churchyard for a “Mare Clausum,” having it in my mind to write a little matter, what I can gather, about the business of striking sayle, and present it to the Duke, which I now think will be a good way to make myself known. So home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-11-30">30th</time>. In the morning to the Temple, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Philips and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Williams about my several law matters, and so to the Wardrobe to dinner, and after dinner stole away, my Lady not dining out of her chamber, and so home and then to the office all the afternoon, and that being done Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten and I and Captain Cock got a bottle of sack into the office, and there we sat late and drank and talked, and so home and to bed. I am this day in very good health, only got a little cold. The Parliament has sat a pretty while. The old condemned judges of the late King have been brought before the Parliament, and like to be hanged. I am deep in Chancery against Tom Trice, God give a good issue; and myself under great trouble for my late great expending of money vainly, which God stop for the future. This is the last day for the old State’s coyne<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-562" id="noteref-562" epub:type="noteref">562</a> to pass in common payments, but they say it is to pass in publique payments to the King three months still.</p>
			</article>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
