<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>January 1659–60</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:diary">
			<h2 epub:type="title">January 1659⁠–⁠60<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-47" id="noteref-47" epub:type="noteref">47</a></h2>
			<article id="entry-1" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p>Blessed be God, at the end of the last year I was in very good health, without any sense of my old pain, but upon taking of cold.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-48" id="noteref-48" epub:type="noteref">48</a> I lived in Axe Yard,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-49" id="noteref-49" epub:type="noteref">49</a> having my wife, and servant Jane, and no more in family than us three. My wife.⁠ ⁠…<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-50" id="noteref-50" epub:type="noteref">50</a> gave me hopes of her being with child, but on the last day of the year.⁠ ⁠… [the hope was belied.]</p>
				<p>The condition of the State was thus; <abbr>viz.</abbr> the Rump, after being disturbed by my Lord Lambert,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-51" id="noteref-51" epub:type="noteref">51</a> was lately returned to sit again. The officers of the Army all forced to yield. Lawson<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-52" id="noteref-52" epub:type="noteref">52</a> lies still in the river, and Monk<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-53" id="noteref-53" epub:type="noteref">53</a> is with his army in Scotland. Only my Lord Lambert is not yet come into the Parliament, nor is it expected that he will without being forced to it. The new Common Council of the City do speak very high; and had sent to Monk their sword-bearer, to acquaint him with their desires for a free and full Parliament, which is at present the desires, and the hopes, and expectation of all. Twenty-two of the old secluded members<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-54" id="noteref-54" epub:type="noteref">54</a> having been at the House-door the last week to demand entrance, but it was denied them; and it is believed that [neither] they nor the people will be satisfied till the House be filled. My own private condition very handsome, and esteemed rich, but indeed very poor; besides my goods of my house, and my office, which at present is somewhat uncertain. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing master of my office.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-55" id="noteref-55" epub:type="noteref">55</a></p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-1-11" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-01-11"><abbr>Jan.</abbr> 1st (Lord’s day)</time>. This morning (we living lately in the garret) I rose, put on my suit with great skirts, having not lately worn any other, clothes but them. Went to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gunning’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-56" id="noteref-56" epub:type="noteref">56</a> chapel at Exeter House,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-57" id="noteref-57" epub:type="noteref">57</a> where he made a very good sermon upon these words:⁠—“That in the fullness of time God sent his Son, made of a woman,” <abbr>etc.</abbr>; showing, that, by “made under the law,” is meant his circumcision, which is solemnized this day. Dined at home in the garret, where my wife dressed the remains of a turkey, and in the doing of it she burned her hand. I stayed at home all the afternoon, looking over my accounts; then went with my wife to my father’s, and in going observed the great posts which the City have set up at the Conduit in Fleet-street.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-58" id="noteref-58" epub:type="noteref">58</a> Supt at my father’s, where in came <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">The.</abbr> Turner<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-59" id="noteref-59" epub:type="noteref">59</a> and Madam Morrice, and supt with us. After that my wife and I went home with them, and so to our own home.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-1-12" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-01-12">2nd</time>. In the morning before I went forth old East brought me a dozen of bottles of sack, and I gave him a shilling for his pains. Then I went to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-60" id="noteref-60" epub:type="noteref">60</a> who was drawing of sack in the wine cellar to send to other places as a gift from my Lord, and told me that my Lord had given him order to give me the dozen of bottles. Thence I went to the Temple to speak with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Calthropp about the £60 due to my Lord,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-61" id="noteref-61" epub:type="noteref">61</a> but missed of him, he being abroad. Then I went to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-62" id="noteref-62" epub:type="noteref">62</a> and borrowed £10 of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Andrewes for my own use, and so went to my office, where there was nothing to do. Then I walked a great while in Westminster Hall, where I heard that Lambert was coming up to London; that my Lord Fairfax<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-63" id="noteref-63" epub:type="noteref">63</a> was in the head of the Irish brigade, but it was not certain what he would declare for. The House was today upon finishing the act for the Council of State, which they did; and for the indemnity to the soldiers; and were to sit again thereupon in the afternoon. Great talk that many places have declared for a free Parliament; and it is believed that they will be forced to fill up the House with the old members. From the Hall I called at home, and so went to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s (my wife she was to go to her father’s), thinking to have dined, but I came too late, so <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-64" id="noteref-64" epub:type="noteref">64</a> and I and another gentleman went out and drank a cup of ale together in the new market,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-65" id="noteref-65" epub:type="noteref">65</a> and there I eat some bread and cheese for my dinner. After that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore and I went as far as Fleet-street together and parted, he going into the City, I to find <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Calthrop, but failed again of finding him, so returned to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s again, and from thence went along with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jemimah<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-66" id="noteref-66" epub:type="noteref">66</a> home, and there she taught me how to play at cribbage.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-67" id="noteref-67" epub:type="noteref">67</a> Then I went home, and finding my wife gone to see <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hunt, I went to Will’s,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-68" id="noteref-68" epub:type="noteref">68</a> and there sat with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ashwell talking and singing till nine o’clock, and so home, there, having not eaten anything but bread and cheese, my wife cut me a slice of brawn which I received from my Lady,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-69" id="noteref-69" epub:type="noteref">69</a> which proves as good as ever I had any. So to bed, and my wife had a very bad night of it through wind and cold.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-1-13" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-01-13">3rd</time>. I went out in the morning, it being a great frost, and walked to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Turner’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-70" id="noteref-70" epub:type="noteref">70</a> to stop her from coming to see me today, because of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jem’s coming, thence I went to the Temple to speak with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Calthrop, and walked in his chamber an hour, but could not see him, so went to Westminster, where I found soldiers in my office to receive money, and paid it them. At noon went home, where <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jem, her maid, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply, Hawly, and Moore dined with me on a piece of beef and cabbage, and a collar of brawn. We then fell to cards till dark, and then I went home with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jem, and meeting <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hawly got him to bear me company to Chancery Lane, where I spoke with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Calthrop, he told me that Sir James Calthrop was lately dead, but that he would write to his Lady, that the money may be speedily paid. Thence back to Whitehall, where I understood that the Parliament had passed the act for indemnity to the soldiers and officers that would come in, in so many days, and that my Lord Lambert should have benefit of the said act. They had also voted that all vacancies in the House, by the death of any of the old members, shall be filled up; but those that are living shall not be called in. Thence I went home, and there found <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hunt and his wife, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hawly, who sat with me till ten at night at cards, and so broke up and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-1-14" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-01-14">4th</time>. Early came <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vanly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-71" id="noteref-71" epub:type="noteref">71</a> to me for his half-year’s rent, which I had not in the house, but took his man to the office and there paid him. Then I went down into the Hall and to Will’s, where Hawly brought a piece of his Cheshire cheese, and we were merry with it. Then into the Hall again, where I met with the Clerk and Quarter Master of my Lord’s troop, and took them to the Swan<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-72" id="noteref-72" epub:type="noteref">72</a> and gave them their morning’s draft,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-73" id="noteref-73" epub:type="noteref">73</a> they being just come to town. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Jenkins showed me two bills of exchange for money to receive upon my Lord’s and my pay. It snowed hard all this morning, and was very cold, and my nose was much swelled with cold. Strange the difference of men’s talk! Some say that Lambert must of necessity yield up; others, that he is very strong, and that the Fifth-monarchy-men<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-74" id="noteref-74" epub:type="noteref">74</a> [will] stick to him, if he declares for a free Parliament. Chillington was sent yesterday to him with the vote of pardon and indemnity from the Parliament. From the Hall I came home, where I found letters from Hinchinbroke<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-75" id="noteref-75" epub:type="noteref">75</a> and news of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply’s going thither the next week. I dined at home, and from thence went to Will’s to Shaw, who promised me to go along with me to Atkinson’s about some money, but I found him at cards with Spicer<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-76" id="noteref-76" epub:type="noteref">76</a> and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D.</abbr> Vines,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-77" id="noteref-77" epub:type="noteref">77</a> and could not get him along with me. I was vext at this, and went and walked in the Hall, where I heard that the Parliament spent this day in fasting and prayer; and in the afternoon came letters from the North, that brought certain news that my Lord Lambert his forces were all forsaking him, and that he was left with only fifty horse, and that he did now declare for the Parliament himself; and that my Lord Fairfax did also rest satisfied, and had laid down his arms, and that what he had done was only to secure the country against my Lord Lambert his raising of money, and free quarter. I went to Will’s again, where I found them still at cards, and Spicer had won 14<abbr>s.</abbr> of Shaw and Vines. Then I spent a little time with <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Vines<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-78" id="noteref-78" epub:type="noteref">78</a> and Maylard at Vines’s at our viols.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-79" id="noteref-79" epub:type="noteref">79</a> So home, and from thence to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hunt’s, and sat with them and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hawly at cards till ten at night, and was much made of by them. Home and so to bed, but much troubled with my nose, which was much swelled.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-1-15" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-01-15">5th</time>. I went to my office, where the money was again expected from the Excise office, but none brought, but was promised to be sent this afternoon. I dined with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply, at my Lord’s lodgings, upon his turkey-pie. And so to my office again; where the Excise money was brought, and some of it told to soldiers till it was dark. Then I went home, and after writing a letter to my Lord and told him the news that the Parliament hath this night voted that the members that were discharged from sitting in the years 1648 and 49, were duly discharged; and that there should be writs issued presently for the calling of others in their places, and that Monk and Fairfax were commanded up to town, and that the Prince’s lodgings<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-80" id="noteref-80" epub:type="noteref">80</a> were to be provided for Monk at Whitehall. Then my wife and I, it being a great frost, went to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jem’s, in expectation to eat a sack-posset, but <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Edward<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-81" id="noteref-81" epub:type="noteref">81</a> not coming it was put off; and so I left my wife playing at cards with her, and went myself with my lantern to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fage, to consult concerning my nose, who told me it was nothing but cold, and after that we did discourse concerning public business; and he told me it is true the City had not time enough to do much, but they are resolved to shake off the soldiers; and that unless there be a free Parliament chosen, he did believe there are half the Common Council will not levy any money by order of this Parliament. From thence I went to my father’s, where I found <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ramsey and her grandchild, a pretty girl, and stayed a while and talked with them and my mother, and then took my leave, only heard of an invitation to go to dinner tomorrow to my cosen Thomas Pepys.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-82" id="noteref-82" epub:type="noteref">82</a> I went back to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jem, and took my wife and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Sheply, and went home.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-1-16" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-01-16">6th</time>. This morning <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply and I did eat our breakfast at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Harper’s, (my brother John<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-83" id="noteref-83" epub:type="noteref">83</a> being with me) upon a cold turkey-pie and a goose. From thence I went to my office, where we paid money to the soldiers till one o’clock, at which time we made an end, and I went home and took my wife and went to my cosen, Thomas Pepys, and found them just sat down to dinner, which was very good; only the venison pasty was palpable beef, which was not handsome. After dinner I took my leave, leaving my wife with my cousin Stradwick<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-84" id="noteref-84" epub:type="noteref">84</a> and went to Westminster to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vines, where George<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-85" id="noteref-85" epub:type="noteref">85</a> and I fiddled a good while, Dick and his wife (who was lately brought to bed) and her sister being there, but <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hudson not coming according to his promise, I went away, and calling at my house on the wench, I took her and the lantern with me to my cosen Stradwick, where, after a good supper, there being there my father, mother, brothers, and sister, my cosen Scott<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-86" id="noteref-86" epub:type="noteref">86</a> and his wife, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Drawwater and his wife, and her brother, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Stradwick, we had a brave cake brought us, and in the choosing, Pall<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-87" id="noteref-87" epub:type="noteref">87</a> was Queen and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Stradwick was King. After that my wife and I bid adieu and came home, it being still a great frost.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-1-17" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-01-17">7th</time>. At my office as I was receiving money of the probate of wills, in came <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Turner, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Theoph.</abbr>, Madame Morrice, and Joyce,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-88" id="noteref-88" epub:type="noteref">88</a> and after I had done I took them home to my house and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hawly came after, and I got a dish of steaks and a rabbit for them, while they were playing a game or two at cards. In the middle of our dinner a messenger from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing came to fetch me to him, so leaving <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hawly there, I went and was forced to stay till night in expectation of the French Embassador,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-89" id="noteref-89" epub:type="noteref">89</a> who at last came, and I had a great deal of good discourse with one of his gentlemen concerning the reason of the difference between the zeal of the French and the Spaniard. After he was gone I went home, and found my friends still at cards, and after that I went along with them to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Whores (sending my wife to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jem’s to a sack-posset), where I heard some symphony and songs of his own making, performed by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> May,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-90" id="noteref-90" epub:type="noteref">90</a> Harding,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-91" id="noteref-91" epub:type="noteref">91</a> and Mallard. Afterwards I put my friends into a coach, and went to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jem’s, where I wrote a letter to my Lord by the post, and had my part of the posset which was saved for me, and so we went home, and put in at my Lord’s lodgings, where we stayed late, eating of part of his turkey-pie, and reading of Quarles’ <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Emblems</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-92" id="noteref-92" epub:type="noteref">92</a> So home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-1-18" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-01-18">8th (Sunday)</time>. In the morning I went to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gunning’s, where a good sermon, wherein he showed the life of Christ, and told us good authority for us to believe that Christ did follow his father’s trade, and was a carpenter till thirty years of age. From thence to my father’s to dinner, where I found my wife, who was forced to dine there, we not having one coal of fire in the house, and it being very hard frosty weather. In the afternoon my father, he going to a man’s to demand some money due to my Aunt Bell,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-93" id="noteref-93" epub:type="noteref">93</a> my wife and I went to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mossum’s,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-94" id="noteref-94" epub:type="noteref">94</a> where a strange doctor made a very good sermon. From thence sending my wife to my father’s, I went to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Turner’s, and stayed a little while, and then to my father’s, where I found <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply, and after supper went home together. Here I heard of the death of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Palmer, and that he was to be buried at Westminster tomorrow.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-1-19" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-01-19">9th</time>. For these two or three days I have been much troubled with thoughts how to get money to pay them that I have borrowed money of, by reason of my money being in my uncle’s hands. I rose early this morning, and looked over and corrected my brother John’s speech, which he is to make the next apposition<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-95" id="noteref-95" epub:type="noteref">95</a> and after that I went towards my office, and in my way met with <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Simons,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-96" id="noteref-96" epub:type="noteref">96</a> Muddiman, and Jack Price, and went with them to Harper’s and in many sorts of talk I stayed till two of the clock in the afternoon. I found Muddiman a good scholar, an arch rogue; and owns that though he writes new books for the Parliament, yet he did declare that he did it only to get money; and did talk very basely of many of them. Among other things, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Simons told me how his uncle Scobell<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-97" id="noteref-97" epub:type="noteref">97</a> was on Saturday last called to the bar, for entering in the journal of the House, for the year 1653, these words: “This day his Excellence the Lord General Cromwell dissolved this House;” which words the Parliament voted a forgery, and demanded of him how they came to be entered. He answered that they were his own handwriting, and that he did it by virtue of his office, and the practice of his predecessor;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-98" id="noteref-98" epub:type="noteref">98</a> and that the intent of the practice was to let posterity know how such and such a Parliament was dissolved, whether by the command of the King, or by their own neglect, as the last House of Lords was; and that to this end, he had said and writ that it was dissolved by his Excellence the Lord G[eneral]; and that for the word dissolved, he never at the time did hear of any other term; and desired pardon if he would not dare to make a word himself when it was six years after, before they came themselves to call it an interruption; but they were so little satisfied with this answer, that they did choose a committee to report to the House, whether this crime of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Scobell’s did come within the act of indemnity or no. Thence I went with Muddiman to the Coffee-House,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-99" id="noteref-99" epub:type="noteref">99</a> and gave 18<abbr>d.</abbr> to be entered of the Club. Thence into the Hall, where I heard for certain that Monk was coming to London, and that Bradshaw’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-100" id="noteref-100" epub:type="noteref">100</a> lodgings were preparing for him. Thence to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jem’s, and found her in bed, and she was afraid that it would prove the smallpox. Thence back to Westminster Hall, where I heard how Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Vane<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-101" id="noteref-101" epub:type="noteref">101</a> was this day voted out of the House, and to sit no more there; and that he would retire himself to his house at Raby,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-102" id="noteref-102" epub:type="noteref">102</a> as also all the rest of the nine officers that had their commissions formerly taken away from them, were commanded to their farthest houses from London during the pleasure of the Parliament. Here I met with the Quarter Master of my Lord’s troop, and his clerk <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Jenings,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-103" id="noteref-103" epub:type="noteref">103</a> and took them home, and gave them a bottle of wine, and the remainder of my collar of brawn; and so good night. After that came in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hawly, who told me that I was mist this day at my office, and that tomorrow I must pay all the money that I have, at which I was put to a great loss how I should get money to make up my cash, and so went to bed in great trouble.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-1-20" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-01-20">10th</time>. Went out early, and in my way met with Greatorex<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-104" id="noteref-104" epub:type="noteref">104</a> and at an alehouse he showed me the first sphere of wire that ever he made, and indeed it was very pleasant; thence to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s, and borrowed £10, and so to my office, and was able to pay my money. Thence into the Hall, and meeting the Quarter Master, Jenings, and Captain Rider, we four went to a cook’s to dinner. Thence Jenings and I into London (it being through heat of the sun a great thaw and dirty) to show our bills of return, and coming back drank a pint of wine at the Star in Cheapside.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-105" id="noteref-105" epub:type="noteref">105</a> So to Westminster, overtaking Captain Okeshott<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-106" id="noteref-106" epub:type="noteref">106</a> in his silk cloak, whose sword got hold of many people in walking. Thence to the Coffeehouse, where were a great confluence of gentlemen; <abbr>viz.</abbr> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-107" id="noteref-107" epub:type="noteref">107</a> Poultny,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-108" id="noteref-108" epub:type="noteref">108</a> chairman, Gold,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-109" id="noteref-109" epub:type="noteref">109</a> <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Petty,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-110" id="noteref-110" epub:type="noteref">110</a> <abbr>etc.</abbr>, where admirable discourse till at night. Thence with Doling<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-111" id="noteref-111" epub:type="noteref">111</a> to Mother Lams, who told me how this day Scott<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-112" id="noteref-112" epub:type="noteref">112</a> was made Intelligencer, and that the rest of the members that were objected against last night, their business was to be heard this day se’nnight. Thence I went home and wrote a letter, and went to Harper’s, and stayed there till Tom<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-113" id="noteref-113" epub:type="noteref">113</a> carried it to the postboy at Whitehall. So home to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-1-21" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-01-21">11th</time>. Being at Will’s with Captain Barker, who hath paid me £300 this morning at my office, in comes my father, and with him I walked, and leave him at <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Joyce’s, and went myself to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s, but came too late to dine, and therefore after a game at shittle-cocks<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-114" id="noteref-114" epub:type="noteref">114</a> with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Walgrave<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-115" id="noteref-115" epub:type="noteref">115</a> and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Edward, I returned to my father, and taking him from <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Joyce’s, who was not abroad himself, we inquired of a porter, and by his direction went to an alehouse, where after a cup or two we parted. I went towards London, and in my way went in to see Crowly, who was now grown a very great loon and very tame. Thence to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Steven’s with a pair of silver snuffers, and bought a pair of shears to cut silver, and so homeward again. From home I went to see <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jem, who was in bed, and now granted to have the smallpox. Back again, and went to the Coffeehouse, but tarried not, and so home.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-1-22" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-01-22">12th</time>. I drink my morning at Harper’s with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply and a seaman, and so to my office, where Captain Holland<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-116" id="noteref-116" epub:type="noteref">116</a> came to see me, and appointed a meeting in the afternoon. Then wrote letters to Hinchinbroke and sealed them at Will’s, and after that went home, and thence to the Half Moon, where I found the Captain and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Billingsly and Newman, a barber, where we were very merry, and had the young man that plays so well on the Welsh harp. Billingsly paid for all. Thence home, and finding my letters this day not gone by the carrier I new sealed them, but my brother Tom coming we fell into discourse about my intention to feast the Joyces. I sent for a bit of meat for him from the cook’s, and forgot to send my letters this night. So I went to bed, and in discourse broke to my wife what my thoughts were concerning my design of getting money by, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-1-23" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-01-23">13th</time>. Coming in the morning to my office, I met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fage and took him to the Swan.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-117" id="noteref-117" epub:type="noteref">117</a> He told me how high Haselrigge,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-118" id="noteref-118" epub:type="noteref">118</a> and Morly,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-119" id="noteref-119" epub:type="noteref">119</a> the last night began at my Lord Mayor’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-120" id="noteref-120" epub:type="noteref">120</a> to exclaim against the City of London, saying that they had forfeited their charter. And how the Chamberlain of the City did take them down, letting them know how much they were formerly beholding to the City, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> He also told me that Monk’s letter that came to them by the sword-bearer was a cunning piece, and that which they did not much trust to; but they were resolved to make no more applications to the Parliament, nor to pay any money, unless the secluded members be brought in, or a free Parliament chosen. Thence to my office, where nothing to do. So to Will’s with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pinkney,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-121" id="noteref-121" epub:type="noteref">121</a> who invited me to their feast at his Hall the next Monday. Thence I went home and took my wife and dined at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wades, and after that we went and visited Catan.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-122" id="noteref-122" epub:type="noteref">122</a> From thence home again, and my wife was very unwilling to let me go forth, but with some discontent would go out if I did, and I going forth towards Whitehall, I saw she followed me, and so I stayed and took her round through Whitehall, and so carried her home angry. Thence I went to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jem, and found her up and merry, and that it did not prove the smallpox, but only the swine-pox; so I played a game or two at cards with her. And so to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vines, where he and I and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hudson played half-a-dozen things, there being there Dick’s wife and her sister. After that I went home and found my wife gone abroad to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hunt’s, and came in a little after me. So to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-1-24" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-01-24">14th</time>. Nothing to do at our office. Thence into the Hall, and just as I was going to dinner from Westminster Hall with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore (with whom I had been in the lobby to hear news, and had spoke with Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-123" id="noteref-123" epub:type="noteref">123</a> about my Lord’s lodgings) to his house, I met with Captain Holland, who told me that he hath brought his wife to my house, so I posted home and got a dish of meat for them. They stayed with me all the afternoon, and went hence in the evening. Then I went with my wife, and left her at market, and went myself to the Coffeehouse, and heard exceeding good argument against <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington’s assertion, that overbalance of propriety [<abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr>, property] was the foundation of government. Home, and wrote to Hinchinbroke, and sent that and my other letter that missed of going on Thursday last. So to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-1-25" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-01-25">15th</time>. Having been exceedingly disturbed in the night with the barking of a dog of one of our neighbours that I could not sleep for an hour or two, I slept late, and then in the morning took physic, and so stayed within all day. At noon my brother John came to me, and I corrected as well as I could his Greek speech to say the Apposition, though I believe he himself was as well able to do it as myself. After that we went to read in the great <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Officiale</i> about the blessing of bells in the Church of Rome.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-124" id="noteref-124" epub:type="noteref">124</a> After that my wife and I in pleasant discourse till night, then I went to supper, and after that to make an end of this week’s notes in this book, and so to bed. It being a cold day and a great snow my physic did not work so well as it should have done.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-1-26" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-01-26">16th</time>. In the morning I went up to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s, and at his bedside he gave me direction to go tomorrow with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Edward to Twickenham, and likewise did talk to me concerning things of state; and expressed his mind how just it was that the secluded members should come to sit again. I went from thence, and in my way went into an alehouse and drank my morning draft with Matthew Andrews and two or three more of his friends, coachmen. And of one of them I did hire a coach to carry us tomorrow to Twickenham. From thence to my office, where nothing to do; but <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing he came and found me all alone; and did mention to me his going back into Holland, and did ask me whether I would go or no, but gave me little encouragement, but bid me consider of it; and asked me whether I did not think that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hawly could perform the work of my office alone or no. I confess I was at a great loss, all the day after, to bethink myself how to carry this business. At noon, Harry Ethall came to me and went along with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Maylard by coach as far as Salsbury Court, and there we set him down, and we went to the Clerks, where we came a little too late, but in a closet we had a very good dinner by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pinkny’s courtesy, and after dinner we had pretty good singing, and one, Hazard, sung alone after the old fashion, which was very much cried up, but I did not like it. Thence we went to the Green Dragon, on Lambeth Hill,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-125" id="noteref-125" epub:type="noteref">125</a> both the <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pinkney’s, Smith, Harrison, Morrice, that sang the bass, Sheply and I, and there we sang of all sorts of things, and I ventured with good success upon things at first sight, and after that I played on my flageolet,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-126" id="noteref-126" epub:type="noteref">126</a> and stayed there till nine o’clock, very merry and drawn on with one song after another till it came to be so late. After that Sheply, Harrison and myself, we went towards Westminster on foot, and at the Golden Lion, near Charing Cross, we went in and drank a pint of wine, and so parted, and thence home, where I found my wife and maid a-washing. I stayed up till the bellman came by with his bell just under my window as I was writing of this very line, and cried, “Past one of the clock, and a cold, frosty, windy morning.” I then went to bed, and left my wife and the maid a-washing still.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-1-27" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-01-27">17th</time>. Early I went to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s, and having given <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Edward money to give the servants, I took him into the coach that waited for us and carried him to my house, where the coach waited for me while I and the child went to Westminster Hall, and bought him some pictures. In the Hall I met <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Woodfine, and took him to Will’s and drank with him. Thence the child and I to the coach, where my wife was ready, and so we went towards Twickenham. In our way, at Kensington we understood how that my Lord Chesterfield had killed another gentleman about half an hour before, and was fled.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-127" id="noteref-127" epub:type="noteref">127</a> We went forward and came about one of the clock to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fuller’s,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-128" id="noteref-128" epub:type="noteref">128</a> but he was out of town, so we had a dinner there, and I gave the child 40<abbr>s.</abbr> to give to the two ushers. After that we parted and went homewards, it being market day at Brainford [Brentford]. I set my wife down and went with the coach to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s, thinking to have spoke with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jem, he having told me the reason of his melancholy was some unkindness from her after so great expressions of love, and how he had spoke to her friends and had their consent, and that he would desire me to take an occasion of speaking with her, but by no means not to heighten her discontent or distaste whatever it be, but to make it up if I can. But he being out of doors, I went away and went to see <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jem, who was now very well again, and after a game or two at cards, I left her. So I went to the Coffee Club, and heard very good discourse; it was in answer to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington’s answer, who said that the state of the Roman government was not a settled government, and so it was no wonder that the balance of propriety was in one hand, and the command in another, it being therefore always in a posture of war; but it was carried by ballot, that it was a steady government, though it is true by the voices it had been carried before that it was an unsteady government; so tomorrow it is to be proved by the opponents that the balance lay in one hand, and the government in another. Thence I went to Westminster, and met Shaw and Washington,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-129" id="noteref-129" epub:type="noteref">129</a> who told me how this day Sydenham<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-130" id="noteref-130" epub:type="noteref">130</a> was voted out of the House for sitting any more this Parliament, and that Salloway<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-131" id="noteref-131" epub:type="noteref">131</a> was voted out likewise and sent to the Tower, during the pleasure of the House. Home and wrote by the Post, and carried to Whitehall, and coming back turned in at Harper’s, where Jack Price was, and I drank with him and he told me, among other, things, how much the Protector<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-132" id="noteref-132" epub:type="noteref">132</a> is altered, though he would seem to bear out his trouble very well, yet he is scarce able to talk sense with a man; and how he will say that “Who should a man trust, if he may not trust to a brother and an uncle;”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-133" id="noteref-133" epub:type="noteref">133</a> and “how much those men have to answer before God Almighty, for their playing the knave with him as they did.” He told me also, that there was £100,000 offered, and would have been taken for his restitution, had not the Parliament come in as they did again; and that he do believe that the Protector will live to give a testimony of his valour and revenge yet before he dies, and that the Protector will say so himself sometimes. Thence I went home, it being late and my wife in bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-1-28" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-01-28">18th</time>. To my office and from thence to Will’s, and there <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply brought me letters from the carrier and so I went home. After that to Wilkinson’s,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-134" id="noteref-134" epub:type="noteref">134</a> where we had a dinner for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Talbot, Adams, Pinkny and his son, but his son did not come. Here we were very merry, and while I was here <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fuller came thither and stayed a little while. After that we all went to my Lord’s, whither came afterwards <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrison, and by chance seeing <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Butler<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-135" id="noteref-135" epub:type="noteref">135</a> coming by I called him in and so we sat drinking a bottle of wine till night. At which time Mistress Ann<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-136" id="noteref-136" epub:type="noteref">136</a> came with the key of my Lord’s study for some things, and so we all broke up and after I had gone to my house and interpreted my Lord’s letter by his character<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-137" id="noteref-137" epub:type="noteref">137</a> I came to her again and went with her to her lodging and from thence to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s, where I advised with him what to do about my Lord’s lodgings and what answer to give to Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Ant.</abbr> Cooper and so I came home and to bed. All the world is at a loss to think what Monk will do: the City saying that he will be for them, and the Parliament saying he will be for them.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-1-29" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-01-29">19th</time>. This morning I was sent for to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing, and at his bed side he told me, that he had a kindness for me, and that he thought that he had done me one; and that was, that he had got me to be one of the Clerks of the Council; at which I was a little stumbled, and could not tell what to do, whether to thank him or no; but by and by I did; but not very heartily, for I feared that his doing of it was but only to ease himself of the salary<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-138" id="noteref-138" epub:type="noteref">138</a> which he gives me. After that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply staying below all this time for me we went thence and met <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierce,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-139" id="noteref-139" epub:type="noteref">139</a> so at the Harp and Ball drank our morning draft and so to Whitehall where I met with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Ant.</abbr> Cooper and did give him some answer from my Lord and he did give us leave to keep the lodgings still. And so we did determine thereupon that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply might now go into the country and would do so tomorrow. Back I went by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing’s order and stayed there till twelve o’clock in expectation of one to come to read some writings, but he came not, so I stayed all alone reading the answer of the Dutch Ambassador to our State,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-140" id="noteref-140" epub:type="noteref">140</a> in answer to the reasons of my Lord’s coming home, which he gave for his coming, and did labour herein to contradict my Lord’s arguments for his coming home. Thence to my office and so with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply and Moore, to dine upon a turkey with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jem, and after that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore and I went to the French Ordinary, where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing this day feasted Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Arth.</abbr> Haselrigge, and a great many more of the Parliament, and did stay to put him in mind of me. Here he gave me a note to go and invite some other members to dinner tomorrow. So I went to Whitehall, and did stay at Marsh’s, with Simons, Luellin, and all the rest of the Clerks of the Council, who I hear are all turned out, only the two Leighs, and they do all tell me that my name was mentioned the last night, but that nothing was done in it. Hence I went and did leave some of my notes at the lodgings of the members and so home. To bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-1-30" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-01-30">20th</time>. In the morning I went to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing’s bedside and gave him an account what I had done as to his guests, and I went thence to my Lord Widdrington<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-141" id="noteref-141" epub:type="noteref">141</a> who I met in the street, going to seal the patents for the judges today, and so could not come to dinner. I called upon <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Calthrop about the money due to my Lord. Here I met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Woodfine and drank with him at the Sun in Chancery Lane and so to Westminster Hall, where at the lobby I spoke with the rest of my guests and so to my office. At noon went by water with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Maylard and Hales to the Swan in Fish Street<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-142" id="noteref-142" epub:type="noteref">142</a> at our Goal Feast, where we were very merry at our Jole of Ling, and from thence after a great and good dinner <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Falconberge<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-143" id="noteref-143" epub:type="noteref">143</a> would go drink a cup of ale at a place where I had like to have shot at a scholar that lay over the house of office. Thence calling on <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Stephens and Wootton (with whom I drank) about business of my Lord’s I went to the Coffee Club where there was nothing done but choosing of a Committee for orders. Thence to Westminster Hall where <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lane<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-144" id="noteref-144" epub:type="noteref">144</a> and the rest of the maids had their white scarfs, all having been at the burial of a young bookseller in the Hall.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-145" id="noteref-145" epub:type="noteref">145</a> Thence to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply’s and took him to my house and drank with him in order to his going tomorrow. So parted and I sat up late making up my accounts before he go. This day three citizens of London went to meet Monk from the Common Council.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-146" id="noteref-146" epub:type="noteref">146</a></p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-1-31" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-01-31">21st</time>. Up early in finishing my accounts and writing to my Lord and from thence to my Lord’s and took leave of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply and possession of all the keys and the house. Thence to my office for some money to pay <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply and sent it him by the old man. I then went to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing who chid me because I did not give him notice of some of his guests failed him but I told him that I sent our porter to tell him and he was not within, but he told me that he was within till past twelve o’clock. So the porter or he lied. Thence to my office where nothing to do. Then with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hawly, he and I went to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s and dined there. Thence into London, to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vernon’s and I received my £25 due by bill for my troopers’ pay. Then back again to Steadman’s. At the Mitre,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-147" id="noteref-147" epub:type="noteref">147</a> in Fleet street, in our way calling on <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fage, who told me how the City have some hopes of Monk. Thence to the Mitre, where I drank a pint of wine, the house being in fitting for Banister to come hither from Paget’s. Thence to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jem and gave her £5. So home and left my money and to Whitehall where Luellin and I drank and talked together an hour at Marsh’s and so up to the clerks’ room, where poor <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cook, a black man, that is like to be put out of his clerk’s place, came and railed at me for endeavouring to put him out and get myself in, when I was already in a good condition. But I satisfied him and after I had wrote a letter there to my Lord, wherein I gave him an account how this day Lenthall<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-148" id="noteref-148" epub:type="noteref">148</a> took his chair again, and [the House] resolved a declaration to be brought in on Monday next to satisfy the world what they intend to do. So home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-2-1" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-02-01">22nd</time>. I went in the morning to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Messum’s,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-149" id="noteref-149" epub:type="noteref">149</a> where I met with <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Thurburn and sat with him in his pew. A very eloquent sermon about the duty of all to give good example in our lives and conversation, which I fear he himself was most guilty of not doing. After sermon, at the door by appointment my wife met me, and so to my father’s to dinner, where we had not been to my shame in a fortnight before. After dinner my father showed me a letter from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Widdrington,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-150" id="noteref-150" epub:type="noteref">150</a> of Christ’s College, in Cambridge, wherein he do express very great kindness for my brother, and my father intends that my brother shall go to him. To church in the afternoon to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Herring,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-151" id="noteref-151" epub:type="noteref">151</a> where a lazy poor sermon. And so home with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Turner and sitting with her a while we went to my father’s where we supt very merry, and so home. This day I began to put on buckles to my shoes, which I have bought yesterday of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wotton.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-2-2" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-02-02">23rd</time>. In the morning called out to carry £20 to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing, which I did and came back, and finding <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierce, the surgeon, I took him to the Axe<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-152" id="noteref-152" epub:type="noteref">152</a> and gave him his morning draft. Thence to my office and there did nothing but make up my balance. Came home and found my wife dressing of the girl’s head, by which she was made to look very pretty. I went out and paid Wilkinson what I did owe him, and brought a piece of beef home for dinner. Thence I went out and paid Waters, the vintner, and went to see <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jem, where I found my Lady Wright,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-153" id="noteref-153" epub:type="noteref">153</a> but Scott was so drunk that he could not be seen. Here I stayed and made up <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ann’s bills, and played a game or two at cards, and thence to Westminster Hall, it being very dark. I paid <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Michell,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-154" id="noteref-154" epub:type="noteref">154</a> my bookseller, and back to Whitehall, and in the garden, going through to the Stone Gallery<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-155" id="noteref-155" epub:type="noteref">155</a> I fell into a ditch, it being very dark. At the Clerk’s chamber I met with Simons and Luellin, and went with them to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mount’s chamber at the Cock Pit, where we had some rare pot venison, and ale to abundance till almost twelve at night, and after a song round we went home. This day the Parliament sat late, and resolved of the declaration to be printed for the people’s satisfaction, promising them a great many good things.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-2-3" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-02-03">24th</time>. In the morning to my office, where, after I had drank my morning draft at Will’s with Ethell and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Stevens, I went and told part of the excise money till twelve o’clock, and then called on my wife and took her to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierces, she in the way being exceedingly troubled with a pair of new pattens, and I vexed to go so slow, it being late. There when we came we found <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Carrick very fine, and one <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lucy, who called one another husband and wife, and after dinner a great deal of mad stir. There was pulling off <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> bride’s and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> bridegroom’s ribbons,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-156" id="noteref-156" epub:type="noteref">156</a> with a great deal of fooling among them that I and my wife did not like. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lucy and several other gentlemen coming in after dinner, swearing and singing as if they were mad, only he singing very handsomely. There came in afterwards <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Southerne,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-157" id="noteref-157" epub:type="noteref">157</a> clerk to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blackburne, and with him Lambert,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-158" id="noteref-158" epub:type="noteref">158</a> lieutenant of my Lord’s ship, and brought with them the declaration that came out today from the Parliament, wherein they declare for law and gospel, and for tithes; but I do not find people apt to believe them. After this taking leave I went to my father’s, and my wife staying there, he and I went to speak with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crumlum<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-159" id="noteref-159" epub:type="noteref">159</a> (in the meantime, while it was five o’clock, he being in the school, we went to my cousin Tom Pepys’ shop,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-160" id="noteref-160" epub:type="noteref">160</a> the turner in Paul’s Churchyard, and drank with him a pot of ale); he gave my father directions what to do about getting my brother an exhibition, and spoke very well of my brother. Thence back with my father home, where he and I spoke privately in the little room to my sister Pall about stealing of things as my wife’s scissors and my maid’s book, at which my father was much troubled. Hence home with my wife and so to Whitehall, where I met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hunt and Luellin, and drank with them at Marsh’s, and afterwards went up and wrote to my Lord by the post. This day the Parliament gave order that the late Committee of Safety should come before them this day se’nnight, and all their papers, and their model of Government that they had made, to be brought in with them. So home and talked with my wife about our dinner on Thursday.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-2-4" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-02-04">25th</time>. Called up early to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing; he gave me a Character, such a one as my Lord’s, to make perfect, and likewise gave me his order for £500 to carry to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Frost, which I did and so to my office, where I did do something about the character till twelve o’clock. Then home find found my wife and the maid at my Lord’s getting things ready against tomorrow. I went by water to my Uncle White’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-161" id="noteref-161" epub:type="noteref">161</a> to dinner, where I met my father, where we alone had a fine jole of Ling to dinner. After dinner I took leave, and coming home heard that in Cheapside there had been but a little before a gibbet set up, and the picture of Huson<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-162" id="noteref-162" epub:type="noteref">162</a> hung upon it in the middle of the street. I called at Paul’s Churchyard, where I bought Buxtorf’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Hebrew Grammar</i>;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-163" id="noteref-163" epub:type="noteref">163</a> and read a declaration of the gentlemen of Northampton which came out this afternoon.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-164" id="noteref-164" epub:type="noteref">164</a> Thence to my father’s, where I stayed with my mother a while and then to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s about a picture to be sent into the country, of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thomas Crew,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-165" id="noteref-165" epub:type="noteref">165</a> to my Lord. So [to] my Lady Wright to speak with her, but she was abroad, so <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Evans, her butler, had me into his buttery, and gave me sack and a lesson on his lute, which he played very well. Thence I went to my Lord’s and got most things ready against tomorrow, as fires and laying the cloth, and my wife was making of her tarts and larding of her pullets till eleven o’clock. This evening <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing sent for me, and gave me order to go to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Jessop<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-166" id="noteref-166" epub:type="noteref">166</a> for his papers concerning his dispatch to Holland which were not ready, only his order for a ship to transport him he gave me. To my Lord’s again and so home with my wife, tired with this day’s work.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-2-5" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-02-05">26th</time>. To my office for £20 to carry to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing, which I did and back again. Then came <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Frost to pay <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing his £500, and I went to him for the warrant and brought it <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Frost. Called for some papers at Whitehall for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing, one of which was an Order of the Council for £1,800 per annum, to be paid monthly; and the other two, Orders to the Commissioners of Customs, to let his goods pass free. Home from my office to my Lord’s lodgings where my wife had got ready a very fine dinner⁠—<abbr>viz.</abbr> a dish of marrow bones; a leg of mutton; a loin of veal; a dish of fowl, three pullets, and two dozen of larks all in a dish; a great tart, a neat’s tongue, a dish of anchovies; a dish of prawns and cheese. My company was my father, my uncle Fenner,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-167" id="noteref-167" epub:type="noteref">167</a> his two sons, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierce, and all their wives, and my brother Tom. We were as merry as I could frame myself to be in the company, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Joyce talking after the old rate and drinking hard, vexed his father and mother and wife. And I did perceive that <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Pierce her coming so gallant, that it put the two young women quite out of courage. When it became dark they all went away but <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierce, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Joyce, and their wives and Tom, and drank a bottle of wine afterwards, so that Will did heartily vex his father and mother by staying. At which I and my wife were much pleased. Then they all went and I fell to writing of two characters for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing, and carried them to him at nine o’clock at night, and he did not like them but corrected them, so that tomorrow I am to do them anew. To my Lord’s lodging again and sat by the great log, it being now a very good fire, with my wife, and ate a bit and so home. The news this day is a letter that speaks absolutely Monk’s concurrence with this Parliament, and nothing else, which yet I hardly believe. After dinner today my father showed me a letter from my Uncle Robert,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-168" id="noteref-168" epub:type="noteref">168</a> in answer to my last, concerning my money which I would have out of my <abbr>Coz.</abbr> Beck’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-169" id="noteref-169" epub:type="noteref">169</a> hand, wherein Beck desires it four months longer, which I know not how to spare.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-2-6" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-02-06">27th</time>. Going to my office I met with Tom Newton, my old comrade, and took him to the Crown in the Palace,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-170" id="noteref-170" epub:type="noteref">170</a> and gave him his morning draft. And as he always did, did talk very high what he would do with the Parliament, that he would have what place he would, and that he might be one of the Clerks to the Council if he would. Here I stayed talking with him till the offices were all shut, and then I looked in the Hall, and was told by my bookseller, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Michell, that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Montagu<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-171" id="noteref-171" epub:type="noteref">171</a> had inquired there for me. So I went to his house, and was forced by him to dine with him, and had a plenteous brave dinner and the greatest civility that ever I had from any man. Thence home and so to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jem, and played with her at cards, and coming home again my wife told me that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hawly had been there to speak with me, and seemed angry that I had not been at the office that day, and she told me she was afraid that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing may have a mind to pick some hole in my coat. So I made haste to him, but found no such thing from him, but he sent me to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sherwin’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-172" id="noteref-172" epub:type="noteref">172</a> about getting <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Squib to come to him tomorrow, and I carried him an answer. So home and fell a writing the characters for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing, and about nine at night <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hawly came, and after he was gone I sat up till almost twelve writing, and⁠—wrote two of them. In the morning up early and wrote another, my wife lying in bed and reading to me.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-2-7" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-02-07">28th</time>. I went to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing and carried him three characters, and then to my office and wrote another, while <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Frost stayed telling money. And after I had done it <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hawly came into the office and I left him and carried it to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing, who then told me that he was resolved to be gone for Holland this morning. So I to my office again, and dispatch my business there, and came with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hawly to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing’s lodging, and took <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Squib from Whitehall in a coach thither with me, and there we waited in his chamber a great while, till he came in; and in the meantime, sent all his things to the barge that lay at Charing-Cross Stairs. Then came he in, and took a very civil leave of me, beyond my expectation, for I was afraid that he would have told me something of removing me from my office; but he did not, but that he would do me any service that lay in his power. So I went down and sent a porter to my house for my best fur cap, but he coming too late with it I did not present it to him. Thence I went to Westminster Hall, and bound up my cap at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Michell’s, who was much taken with my cap, and endeavoured to overtake the coach at the Exchange and to give it him there, but I met with one that told me that he was gone, and so I returned and went to Heaven,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-173" id="noteref-173" epub:type="noteref">173</a> where Luellin and I dined on a breast of mutton all alone, discoursing of the changes that we have seen and the happiness of them that have estates of their own, and so parted, and I went by appointment to my office and paid young <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Walton £500; it being very dark he took £300 by content. He gave me half a piece and carried me in his coach to <abbr>St.</abbr> Clement’s, from whence I went to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s and made even with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Andrews, and took in all my notes and gave him one for all. Then to my Lady Wright and gave her my Lord’s letter which he bade me give her privately. So home and then to Will’s for a little news, then came home again and wrote to my Lord, and so to Whitehall and gave them to the post-boy. Back again home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-2-8" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-02-08">29th</time>. In the morning I went to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gunning’s, where he made an excellent sermon upon the 2nd of the Galatians, about the difference that fell between <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul and <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter (the feast day of <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul being a day or two ago), whereby he did prove, that, contrary to the doctrine of the Roman Church, <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul did never own any dependance, or that he was inferior to <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter, but that they were equal, only one a particular charge of preaching to the Jews, and the other to the Gentiles. Here I met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore, and went home with him to dinner to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s, where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Spurrier being in town did dine with us. From thence I went home and spent the afternoon in casting up my accounts, and do find myself to be worth £40 and more, which I did not think, but am afraid that I have forgot something. To my father’s to supper, where I heard by my brother Tom how <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Joyce would the other day have <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierce and his wife to the tavern after they were gone from my house, and that he had so little manners as to make Tom pay his share notwithstanding that he went upon his account, and by my father I understand that my uncle Fenner and my aunt were much pleased with our entertaining them. After supper home without going to see <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Turner.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-2-9" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-02-09">30th</time>. This morning, before I was up, I fell a-singing of my song, “Great, good, and just,” <abbr>etc.</abbr><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-174" id="noteref-174" epub:type="noteref">174</a> and put myself thereby in mind that this was the fatal day, now ten years since, his Majesty died. Scull the waterman came and brought me a note from the Hope<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-175" id="noteref-175" epub:type="noteref">175</a> from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hawly with direction, about his money, he tarrying there till his master be gone. To my office, where I received money of the excise of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ruddyer, and after we had done went to Will’s and stayed there till 3 o’clock and then I taking my £12 10<abbr>s.</abbr> 0<abbr>d.</abbr> due to me for my last quarter’s salary, I went with them by water to London to the house where <abbr>Sign<sup>r</sup></abbr> Torriano<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-176" id="noteref-176" epub:type="noteref">176</a> used to be and stayed there a while with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ashwell, Spicer and Ruddier. Then I went and paid £12 17<abbr>s.</abbr> 6<abbr>d.</abbr> due from me to <abbr>Capt<sup>n</sup></abbr> Dick Matthews according to his direction the last week in a letter. After that I came back by water playing on my flageolette and not finding my wife come home again from her father’s I went and sat awhile and played at cards with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jem, whose maid had newly got an ague and was ill thereupon. So homewards again, having great need to do my business, and so pretending to meet <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shott the wood monger of Whitehall I went and eased myself at the Harp and Ball, and thence home where I sat writing till bedtime and so to bed. There seems now to be a general cease of talk, it being taken for granted that Monk do resolve to stand to the Parliament, and nothing else. Spent a little time this night in knocking up nails for my hat and cloaks in my chamber.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-2-10" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-02-10">31st</time>. In the morning I fell to my lute till 9 o’clock. Then to my Lord’s lodgings and set out a barrel of soap to be carried to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ann. Here I met with Nick Bartlet, one that had been a servant of my Lord’s at sea and at Harper’s gave him his morning draft. So to my office where I paid £1,200 to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Frost and at noon went to Will’s to give one of the Excise office a pot of ale that came today to tell over a bag of his that wanted £7 in it, which he found over in another bag. Then home and dined with my wife when in came <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hawly newly come from shipboard from his master, and brought me a letter of direction what to do in his lawsuit with Squib about his house and office. After dinner to Westminster Hall, where all we clerks had orders to wait upon the Committee, at the Star Chamber that is to try Colonel Jones,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-177" id="noteref-177" epub:type="noteref">177</a> and were to give an account what money we had paid him; but the Committee did not sit today. Hence to Will’s, where I sat an hour or two with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Godfrey Austin, a scrivener in King Street. Here I met and afterwards bought the answer to General Monk’s letter, which is a very good one, and I keep it by me. Thence to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jem, where I found her maid in bed in a fit of the ague, and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jem among the people below at work and by and by she came up hot and merry, as if they had given her wine, at which I was troubled, but said nothing; after a game at cards, I went home and wrote by the post and coming back called in at Harper’s and drank with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pulford, servant to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Waterhouse,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-178" id="noteref-178" epub:type="noteref">178</a> who tells me, that whereas my Lord Fleetwood should have answered to the Parliament today, he wrote a letter and desired a little more time, he being a great way out of town. And how that he is quite ashamed of himself, and confesses how he had deserved this, for his baseness to his brother. And that he is like to pay part of the money, paid out of the Exchequer during the Committee of Safety, out of his own purse again, which I am glad of. Home and to bed, leaving my wife reading in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Polixandre</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-179" id="noteref-179" epub:type="noteref">179</a> I could find nothing in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing’s letter, which Hawly brought me, concerning my office; but I could discern that Hawly had a mind that I would get to be Clerk of the Council, I suppose that he might have the greater salary; but I think it not safe yet to change this for a public employment.</p>
			</article>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
