<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>February 1659⁠–⁠1660</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:diary">
			<h2 epub:type="title">February 1659⁠–⁠1660</h2>
			<article id="entry-1660-02-11" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-02-11">February 1st</time>. In the morning went to my office where afterwards the old man brought me my letters from the carrier. At noon I went home and dined with my wife on pease porridge and nothing else. After that I went to the Hall and there met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Swan and went with him to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing’s Counsellor, who did put me in very little hopes about the business between <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing and Squib, and told me that Squib would carry it against him, at which I was much troubled, and with him went to Lincoln’s Inn and there spoke with his attorney, who told me the day that was appointed for the trial. From thence I went to Sir Harry Wright’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-180" id="noteref-180" epub:type="noteref">180</a> and got him to give me his hand for the £60 which I am tomorrow to receive from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Calthrop and from thence to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jem and spoke with Madam Scott<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-181" id="noteref-181" epub:type="noteref">181</a> and her husband who did promise to have the thing for her neck done this week. Thence home and took Gammer East, and James the porter, a soldier, to my Lord’s lodgings, who told me how they were drawn into the field today, and that they were ordered to march away tomorrow to make room for General Monk; but they did shut their Colonel Fitch,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-182" id="noteref-182" epub:type="noteref">182</a> and the rest of the officers out of the field, and swore they would not go without their money, and if they would not give it them, they would go where they might have it, and that was the City. So the Colonel went to the Parliament, and commanded what money could be got, to be got against tomorrow for them, and all the rest of the soldiers in town, who in all places made a mutiny this day, and do agree together. Here I took some bedding to send to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ann for her to lie in now she hath her fits of the ague. Thence I went to Will’s and staid like a fool there and played at cards till 9 o’clock and so came home, where I found <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hunt and his wife who staid and sat with me till 10 and so good night.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-02-12" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-02-12">2nd</time>. Drank at Harper’s with Doling, and so to my office, where I found all the officers of the regiments in town, waiting to receive money that their soldiers might go out of town, and what was in the Exchequer they had. At noon after dining at home I called at Harper’s for Doling, and he and I met with Luellin and drank with him at the Exchequer at Charing Cross, and thence he and I went to the Temple to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Calthrop’s chamber, and from thence had his man by water to London Bridge to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Calthrop, a grocer, and received £60 for my Lord. In our way we talked with our waterman, White,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-183" id="noteref-183" epub:type="noteref">183</a> who told us how the watermen had lately been abused by some that had a desire to get in to be watermen to the State, and had lately presented an address of nine or ten thousand hands to stand by this Parliament, when it was only told them that it was to a petition against hackney coaches; and that today they had put out another to undeceive the world and to clear themselves, and that among the rest Cropp, my waterman and one of great practice, was one that did cheat them thus. After I had received the money we went to the Bridge Tavern and drank a quart of wine and so back by water, landing <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Calthrop’s man at the Temple and we went homewards, but over against Somerset House, hearing the noise of guns, we landed and found the Strand full of soldiers. So I took my money and went to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Johnson, my Lord’s sempstress, and giving her my money to lay up, Doling and I went up stairs to a window, and looked out and see the foot face the horse and beat them back, and stood bawling and calling in the street for a free Parliament and money. By and by a drum was heard to beat a march coming towards them, and they got all ready again and faced them, and they proved to be of the same mind with them; and so they made a great deal of joy to see one another. After all this, I took my money, and went home on foot and laying up my money, and changing my stockings and shoes, I this day having left off my great skirt suit, and put on my white suit with silver lace coat, and went over to Harper’s, where I met with <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Simons, Doling, Luellin and three merchants, one of which had occasion to use a porter, so they sent for one, and James the soldier came, who told us how they had been all day and night upon their guard at <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s, and that through the whole town they did resolve to stand to what they had began, and that tomorrow he did believe they would go into the City, and be received there. After all this we went to a sport called, selling of a horse for a dish of eggs and herrings, and sat talking there till almost twelve o’clock and then parted, they were to go as far as Aldgate. Home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-02-13" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-02-13">3rd</time>. Drank my morning draft at Harper’s, and was told there that the soldiers were all quiet upon promise of pay. Thence to <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s Park, and walked there to my place for my flageolet and then played a little, it being a most pleasant morning and sunshine. Back to Whitehall, where in the guard-chamber I saw about thirty or forty ’prentices of the City, who were taken at twelve o’clock last night and brought prisoners hither. Thence to my office, where I paid a little more money to some of the soldiers under <abbr>Lieut.</abbr>-<abbr>Col.</abbr> Miller (who held out the Tower against the Parliament after it was taken away from Fitch by the Committee of Safety, and yet he continued in his office). About noon <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Turner came to speak with me, and Joyce, and I took them and showed them the manner of the Houses sitting, the doorkeeper very civilly opening the door for us. Thence with my cozen Roger Pepys,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-184" id="noteref-184" epub:type="noteref">184</a> it being term time, we took him out of the Hall to Priors,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-185" id="noteref-185" epub:type="noteref">185</a> the Rhenish wine-house, and there had a pint or two of wine and a dish of anchovies, and bespoke three or four dozen bottles of wine for him against his wedding. After this done he went away, and left me order to call and pay for all that <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Turner would have. So we called for nothing more there, but went and bespoke a shoulder of mutton at Wilkinson’s to be roasted as well as it could be done, and sent a bottle of wine home to my house. In the meantime she and I and Joyce went walking all over White Hall, whither General Monk was newly come, and we saw all his forces march by in very good plight and stout officers. Thence to my house where we dined, but with a great deal of patience, for the mutton came in raw, and so we were fain to stay the stewing of it. In the meantime we sat studying a Posy<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-186" id="noteref-186" epub:type="noteref">186</a> for a ring for her which she is to have at Roger Pepys his wedding. After dinner I left them and went to hear news, but only found that the Parliament House was most of them with Monk at White Hall, and that in his passing through the town he had many calls to him for a free Parliament, but little other welcome. I saw in the Palace Yard how unwilling some of the old soldiers were yet to go out of town without their money, and swore if they had it not in three days, as they were promised, they would do them more mischief in the country than if they had staid here; and that is very likely, the country being all discontented. The town and guards are already full of Monk’s soldiers. I returned, and it growing dark I and they went to take a turn in the park, where <abbr class="name">Theoph.</abbr> (who was sent for to us to dinner) outran my wife and another poor woman, that laid a pot of ale with me that she would outrun her. After that I set them as far as Charing Cross, and there left them and my wife, and I went to see <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ann, who began very high about a flock bed I sent her, but I took her down. Here I played at cards till 9 o’clock. So home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-02-14" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-02-14">4th</time>. In the morning at my lute an hour, and so to my office, where I staid expecting to have <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Squib come to me, but he did not. At noon walking in the Hall I found <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Swan and got him and Captain Stone together, and there advised about <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing’s business. So to Will’s, and sat there till three o’clock and then to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Swan’s, where I found his wife in very genteel mourning for her father, and took him out by water to the Counsellor at the Temple, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Stephens, and from thence to Gray’s Inn, thinking to speak with Sotherton Ellis, but found him not, so we met with an acquaintance of his in the walks, and went and drank, where I ate some bread and butter, having ate nothing all day, while they were by chance discoursing of Marriot, the great eater, so that I was, I remember, ashamed to eat what I would have done. Here Swan showed us a ballad to the tune of Mardike which was most incomparably wrote in a printed hand, which I borrowed of him, but the song proved but silly, and so I did not write it out. Thence we went and leaving Swan at his master’s, my Lord Widdrington, I met with Spicer, Washington, and <abbr class="name">D.</abbr> Vines in Lincoln’s Inn Court, and they were buying of a hanging jack to roast birds on of a fellow that was there selling of some. I was fain to slip from there and went to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Crew’s to her and advised about a maid to come and be with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jem while her maid is sick, but she could spare none. Thence to Sir Harry Wright’s, but my lady not being within I spoke to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Carter about it, who will get one against Monday. So with a link boy<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-187" id="noteref-187" epub:type="noteref">187</a> to Scott’s, where <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ann was in a heat, but I spoke not to her, but told <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jem what I had done, and after that went home and wrote letters into the country by the post, and then played awhile on my lute, and so done, to supper and then to bed. All the news today is, that the Parliament this morning voted the House to be made up four hundred forthwith. This day my wife killed her turkeys that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply gave her, that came out of Zealand with my Lord, and could not get her maid Jane by no means at any time to kill anything.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-02-15" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-02-15">5th (Lord’s day)</time>. In the morning before church time <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hawly, who had for this day or two looked something sadly, which methinks did speak something in his breast concerning me, came to me telling me that he was out £24 which he could not tell what was become of, and that he do remember that he had such a sum in a bag the other day, and could not tell what he did with it, at which I was very sorry but could not help him. In the morning to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gunning, where a stranger, an old man, preached a good honest sermon upon “What manner of love is this that we should be called the sons of God.” After sermon I could not find my wife, who promised to be at the gate against my coming out, and waited there a great while; then went to my house and finding her gone I returned and called at the Chequers, thinking to dine at the ordinary with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Chetwind and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thomas, but they not being there I went to my father and found her there, and there I dined. To their church in the afternoon, and in <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Turner’s pew my wife took up a good black hood and kept it. A stranger preached a poor sermon, and so read over the whole book of the story of Tobit. After sermon home with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Turner, staid with her a little while, then she went into the court to a christening and we to my father’s, where I wrote some notes for my brother John to give to the Mercers<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-188" id="noteref-188" epub:type="noteref">188</a> tomorrow, it being the day of their apposition. After supper home, and before going to bed I staid writing of this day its passages, while a drum came by, beating of a strange manner of beat, now and then a single stroke, which my wife and I wondered at, what the meaning of it should be. This afternoon at church I saw Dick Cumberland<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-189" id="noteref-189" epub:type="noteref">189</a> newly come out of the country from his living, but did not speak to him.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-02-16" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-02-16">6th</time>. Before I went to my office I went to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s and paid <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Andrews the same £60 that he had received of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Calthrop the last week. So back to Westminster and walked with him thither, where we found the soldiers all set in the Palace Yard, to make way for General Monk to come to the House.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-190" id="noteref-190" epub:type="noteref">190</a> At the Hall we parted, and meeting Swan, he and I to the Swan and drank our morning draft. So back again to the Hall, where I stood upon the steps and saw Monk go by, he making observance to the judges as he went along. At noon my father dined with me upon my turkey that was brought from Denmark, and after dinner he and I to the Bull Head Tavern, where we drank half a pint of wine and so parted. I to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ann, and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jem being gone out of the chamber she and I had a very high bout, I rattled her up, she being in her bed, but she becoming more cool, we parted pretty good friends. Thence I went to Will’s, where I staid at cards till 10 o’clock, losing half a crown, and so home to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-02-17" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-02-17">7th</time>. In the morning I went early to give <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hawly notice of my being forced to go into London, but he having also business we left our office business to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Spicer and he and I walked as far as the Temple, where I halted a little and then went to Paul’s School, but it being too soon, went and drank my morning draft with my cozen Tom Pepys the turner,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-191" id="noteref-191" epub:type="noteref">191</a> and saw his house and shop, thence to school, where he that made the speech for the seventh form in praise of the founder, did show a book which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crumlum had lately got, which is believed to be of the Founder’s own writing.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-192" id="noteref-192" epub:type="noteref">192</a> After all the speeches, in which my brother John came off as well as any of the rest, I went straight home and dined, then to the Hall, where in the Palace I saw Monk’s soldiers abuse Billing and all the Quakers, that were at a meeting-place there, and indeed the soldiers did use them very roughly and were to blame.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-193" id="noteref-193" epub:type="noteref">193</a> So after drinking with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Spicer, who had received £600 for me this morning, I went to <abbr>Capt.</abbr> Stone and with him by coach to the Temple Gardens (all the way talking of the disease of the stone), where we met <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Squib, but would do nothing till tomorrow morning. Thence back on foot home, where I found a letter from my Lord in character,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-194" id="noteref-194" epub:type="noteref">194</a> which I construed, and after my wife had shown me some ribbon and shoes that she had taken out of a box of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Montagu’s which formerly <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Kipps had left here when his master was at sea, I went to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew and advised with him about it, it being concerning my Lord’s coming up to Town, which he desires upon my advice the last week in my letter. Thence calling upon <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ann I went home, and wrote in character to my Lord in answer to his letter. This day <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew told me that my Lord <abbr>St.</abbr> John<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-195" id="noteref-195" epub:type="noteref">195</a> is for a free Parliament, and that he is very great with Monk, who hath now the absolute command and power to do anything that he hath a mind to do. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore told me of a picture hung up at the Exchange of a great pair of buttocks shooting of a turd into Lawson’s mouth, and over it was wrote “The thanks of the house.” Boys do now cry “Kiss my Parliament,” instead of “Kiss my [rump],” so great and general a contempt is the Rump come to among all the good and bad.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-02-18" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-02-18">8th</time>. A little practice on my flageolet, and afterwards walking in my yard to see my stock of pigeons, which begin now with the spring to breed very fast. I was called on by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fossan,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-196" id="noteref-196" epub:type="noteref">196</a> my fellow pupil at Cambridge, and I took him to the Swan in the Palace yard, and drank together our morning draft. Thence to my office, where I received money, and afterwards <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Carter,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-197" id="noteref-197" epub:type="noteref">197</a> my old friend at Cambridge, meeting me as I was going out of my office I took him to the Swan, and in the way I met with Captain Lidcott, and so we three went together and drank there, the Captain talking as high as ever he did, and more because of the fall of his brother Thurlow.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-198" id="noteref-198" epub:type="noteref">198</a> Hence I went to Captain Stone, who told me how Squib had been with him, and that he could do nothing with him, so I returned to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Carter and with him to Will’s, where I spent upon him and Monsieur L’Impertinent, alias <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Butler, who I took thither with me, and thence to a Rhenish wine house, and in our way met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hoole, where I paid for my cozen Roger Pepys his wine, and after drinking we parted. So I home, in my way delivering a letter which among the rest I had from my Lord today to Sir <abbr class="name">N.</abbr> Wheeler. At home my wife’s brother<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-199" id="noteref-199" epub:type="noteref">199</a> brought her a pretty black dog which I liked very well, and went away again. Hence sending a porter with the hamper of bottles to the Temple I called in my way upon <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jem, who was much frighted till I came to tell her that her mother was well. So to the Temple, where I delivered the wine and received the money of my <abbr>cos.</abbr> Roger that I laid out, and thence to my father’s, where he showed me a base angry letter that he had newly received from my uncle Robert about my brother John, at which my father was very sad, but I comforted him and wrote an answer. My brother John has an exhibition granted him from the school. My father and I went down to his kitchen, and there we eat and drank, and about 9 o’clock I went away homewards, and in Fleet Street, received a great jostle from a man that had a mind to take the wall, which I could not help.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-200" id="noteref-200" epub:type="noteref">200</a> I came home and to bed. Went to bed with my head not well by my too much drinking today, and I had a boil under my chin which troubled me cruelly.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-02-19" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-02-19">9th</time>. Soon as out of my bed I wrote letters into the country to go by carrier today. Before I was out of my bed, I heard the soldiers very busy in the morning, getting their horses ready where they lay at Hilton’s, but I knew not then their meaning in so doing: After I had wrote my letters I went to Westminster up and down the Hall, and with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Swan walked a good [deal] talking about <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing’s business. I went with him to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Phelps’s house where he had some business to solicit, where we met <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rogers my neighbour, who did solicit against him and talked very high, saying that he would not for a £1,000 appear in a business that Swan did, at which Swan was very angry, but I believe he might be guilty enough. In the Hall I understand how Monk is this morning gone into London with his army; and met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fage, who told me that he do believe that Monk is gone to secure some of the Common-council of the City, who were very high yesterday there, and did vote that they would not pay any taxes till the House was filled up. I went to my office, where I wrote to my Lord after I had been at the Upper Bench,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-201" id="noteref-201" epub:type="noteref">201</a> where Sir Robert Pye<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-202" id="noteref-202" epub:type="noteref">202</a> this morning came to desire his discharge from the Tower; but it could not be granted. After that I went to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jem, who I had promised to go along with to her Aunt Wright’s, but she was gone, so I went thither, and after drinking a glass of sack I went back to Westminster Hall, and meeting with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierce the surgeon, who would needs take me home, where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lucy, Burrell, and others dined, and after dinner I went home and to Westminster Hall, where meeting Swan I went with him by water to the Temple to our Counsel, and did give him a fee to make a motion tomorrow in the Exchequer for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing. Thence to Westminster Hall, where I heard an action very finely pleaded between my Lord Dorset<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-203" id="noteref-203" epub:type="noteref">203</a> and some other noble persons, his lady and other ladies of quality being here, and it was about £330 per annum, that was to be paid to a poor Spittal,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-204" id="noteref-204" epub:type="noteref">204</a> which was given by some of his predecessors; and given on his side. Thence Swan and I to a drinking-house near Temple Bar, where while he wrote I played on my flageolet till a dish of poached eggs was got ready for us, which we eat, and so by coach home. I called at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harper’s, who told me how Monk had this day clapt up many of the Common-council, and that the Parliament had voted that he should pull down their gates and portcullisses, their posts and their chains, which he do intend to do, and do lie in the City all night. I went home and got some ahlum to my mouth, where I have the beginnings of a cancer, and had also a plaster to my boil underneath my chin.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-02-20" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-02-20">10th</time>. In the morning I went to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Swan, who took me to the Court of Wards,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-205" id="noteref-205" epub:type="noteref">205</a> where I saw the three Lords Commissioners sitting upon some cause where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Scobell was concerned, and my Lord Fountaine<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-206" id="noteref-206" epub:type="noteref">206</a> took him up very roughly about some things that he said. After that we went to the Exchequer, where the Barons were hearing of causes, and there I made affidavit that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing was gone into Holland by order of the Council of State, and this affidavit I gave to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Stevens our lawyer. Thence to my office, where I got money of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hawly to pay the lawyer, and there found <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lenard, one of the Clerks of the Council, and took him to the Swan and gave him his morning draft. Then home to dinner, and after that to the Exchequer, where I heard all the afternoon a great many causes before the Barons; in the end came ours, and Squib proved clearly by his patent that the house and office did now belong to him. Our lawyer made some kind of opposition, but to no purpose, and so the cause was found against us, and the foreman of the jury brought in £10 damages, which the whole Court cried shame of, and so he cried 12<abbr class="currency eoc">d.</abbr> Thence I went home, vexed about this business, and there I found <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore, and with him went into London to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fage about the cancer in my mouth, which begins to grow dangerous, who gave me something for it, and also told me what Monk had done in the City, how he had pulled down the most part of the gates and chains that they could break down, and that he was now gone back to White Hall. The City look mighty blank, and cannot tell what in the world to do; the Parliament having this day ordered that the Common-council sit no more; but that new ones be chosen according to what qualifications they shall give them. Thence I went and drank with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore at the Sugar Loaf<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-207" id="noteref-207" epub:type="noteref">207</a> by Temple Bar, where Swan and I were last night, and so we parted. At home I found <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hunt, who sat talking with me awhile, and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-02-21" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-02-21">11th</time>. This morning I lay long abed, and then to my office, where I read all the morning my Spanish book of Rome. At noon I walked in the Hall, where I heard the news of a letter from Monk, who was now gone into the City again, and did resolve to stand for the sudden filling up of the House, and it was very strange how the countenance of men in the Hall was all changed with joy in half an hour’s time. So I went up to the lobby, where I saw the Speaker reading of the letter; and after it was read, Sir <abbr class="name">A.</abbr> Haselrigge came out very angry, and Billing<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-208" id="noteref-208" epub:type="noteref">208</a> standing at the door, took him by the arm, and cried, “Thou man, will thy beast carry thee no longer? thou must fall!” The House presently after rose, and appointed to meet again at three o’clock. I went then down into the Hall, where I met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Chetwind, who had not dined no more than myself, and so we went toward London, in our way calling at two or three shops, but could have no dinner. At last, within Temple Bar, we found a pullet ready roasted, and there we dined. After that he went to his office in Chancery Lane, calling at the Rolls, where I saw the lawyers pleading. Then to his office, where I sat in his study singing, while he was with his man (<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Powell’s son) looking after his business. Thence we took coach for the City to Guildhall, where the Hall was full of people expecting Monk and Lord Mayor<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-209" id="noteref-209" epub:type="noteref">209</a> to come thither, and all very joyfull. Here we stayed a great while, and at last meeting with a friend of his we went to the 3 Tun tavern and drank half a pint of wine, and not liking the wine we went to an alehouse, where we met with company of this third man’s acquaintance, and there we drank a little. Hence I went alone to Guildhall to see whether Monk was come again or no, and met with him coming out of the chamber where he had been with the Mayor and Aldermen, but such a shout I never heard in all my life, crying out, “God bless your Excellence.” Here I met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lock,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-210" id="noteref-210" epub:type="noteref">210</a> and took him to an alehouse, and left him there to fetch Chetwind; when we were come together, Lock told us the substance of the letter that went from Monk to the Parliament; wherein, after complaints that he and his officers were put upon such offices against the City as they could not do with any content or honour, that there are many members now in the House that were of the late tyrannical Committee of Safety.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-211" id="noteref-211" epub:type="noteref">211</a> That Lambert and Vane are now in town, contrary to the vote of Parliament. That there were many in the House that do press for new oaths to be put upon men; whereas we have more cause to be sorry for the many oaths that we have already taken and broken. That the late petition of the fanatique people presented by Barebone,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-212" id="noteref-212" epub:type="noteref">212</a> for the imposing of an oath upon all sorts of people, was received by the House with thanks. That therefore he [Monk] do desire that all writs for filling up of the House be issued by Friday next, and that in the meantime, he would retire into the City and only leave them guards for the security of the House and Council. The occasion of this was the order that he had last night to go into the City and disarm them, and take away their charter; whereby he and his officers say that the House had a mind to put them upon things that should make them odious; and so it would be in their power to do what they would with them. He told us that they [the Parliament] had sent Scott<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-213" id="noteref-213" epub:type="noteref">213</a> and Robinson to him [Monk] this afternoon, but he would not hear them. And that the Mayor and Aldermen had offered him their own houses for himself and his officers; and that his soldiers would lack for nothing. And indeed I saw many people give the soldiers drink and money, and all along in the streets cried, “God bless them!” and extraordinary good words. Hence we went to a merchant’s house hard by, where Lock wrote a note and left, where I saw Sir <abbr class="name">Nich.</abbr> Crisp,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-214" id="noteref-214" epub:type="noteref">214</a> and so we went to the Star Tavern<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-215" id="noteref-215" epub:type="noteref">215</a> (Monk being then at Benson’s), where we dined and I wrote a letter to my Lord from thence. In Cheapside there was a great many bonfires, and Bow bells and all the bells in all the churches as we went home were a-ringing. Hence we went homewards, it being about ten o’clock. But the common joy that was every where to be seen! The number of bonfires, there being fourteen between <abbr>St.</abbr> Dunstan’s and Temple Bar, and at Strand Bridge<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-216" id="noteref-216" epub:type="noteref">216</a> I could at one view tell thirty-one fires. In King-street seven or eight; and all along burning, and roasting, and drinking for rumps. There being rumps tied upon sticks and carried up and down. The butchers at the May Pole in the Strand<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-217" id="noteref-217" epub:type="noteref">217</a> rang a peal with their knives when they were going to sacrifice their rump. On Ludgate Hill there was one turning of the spit that had a rump tied upon it, and another basting of it. Indeed it was past imagination, both the greatness and the suddenness of it. At one end of the street you would think there was a whole lane of fire, and so hot that we were fain to keep still on the further side merely for heat. We came to the Chequers at Charing Cross, where Chetwind wrote a letter and I gave him an account of what I had wrote for him to write. Thence home and sent my letters to the posthouse in London, and my wife and I (after <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hunt was gone, whom I found waiting at my house) went out again to show her the fires, and after walking as far as the Exchange we returned and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-02-22" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-02-22">12th</time>. In the morning, it being Lord’s day, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierce came to me to enquire how things go. We drank our morning draft together and thence to White Hall, where <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Hones<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-218" id="noteref-218" epub:type="noteref">218</a> preached; but I staid not to hear, but walking in the court, I heard that Sir <abbr class="name">Arth.</abbr> Haselrigge was newly gone into the City to Monk, and that Monk’s wife<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-219" id="noteref-219" epub:type="noteref">219</a> removed from White Hall last night. Home again, where at noon came according to my invitation my <abbr>cos.</abbr> <abbr class="name">Thos.</abbr> Pepys and his partner and dined with me, but before dinner we went and took a walk round the park, it being a most pleasant day as ever I saw. After dinner we three went into London together, where I heard that Monk had been at Paul’s in the morning, and the people had shouted much at his coming out of the church. In the afternoon he was at a church in Broad-street,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-220" id="noteref-220" epub:type="noteref">220</a> whereabout he do lodge. But not knowing how to see him we went and walked half a hour in Moorfields, which were full of people, it being so fine a day. Here I took leave of them, and so to Paul’s, where I met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Kirton’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-221" id="noteref-221" epub:type="noteref">221</a> apprentice (the crooked fellow) and walked up and down with him two hours, sometimes in the street looking for a tavern to drink in, but not finding any open, we durst not knock; other times in the churchyard, where one told me that he had seen the letter printed. Thence to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turner’s, where I found my wife, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">Edw.</abbr> Pepys,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-222" id="noteref-222" epub:type="noteref">222</a> and Roger<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-223" id="noteref-223" epub:type="noteref">223</a> and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Armiger being there, to whom I gave as good an account of things as I could, and so to my father’s, where Charles Glascocke<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-224" id="noteref-224" epub:type="noteref">224</a> was overjoyed to see how things are now; who told me the boys had last night broke Barebone’s windows. Hence home, and being near home we missed our maid, and were at a great loss and went back a great way to find her, but when we could not see her we went homewards and found her there, got before us which we wondered at greatly. So to bed, where my wife and I had some high words upon my telling her that I would fling the dog which her brother gave her out of window if he [dirtied] the house any more.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-02-23" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-02-23">13th</time>. To my office till noon, thence home to dinner, my mouth being very bad of the cancer and my left leg beginning to be sore again. After dinner to see <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jem, and in the way met with Catan on foot in the street and talked with her a little, so home and took my wife to my father’s. In my way I went to Playford’s,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-225" id="noteref-225" epub:type="noteref">225</a> and for two books that I had and 6<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> 6<abbr class="currency">d.</abbr> to boot I had my great book of songs which he sells always for 14<abbr class="currency eoc">s.</abbr> At my father’s I staid a while, while my mother sent her maid Bess to Cheapside for some herbs to make a water for my mouth. Then I went to see <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cumberland, and after a little stay with him I returned, and took my wife home, where after supper to bed. This day Monk was invited to White Hall to dinner by my Lords; not seeming willing, he would not come. I went to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fage from my father’s, who had been this afternoon with Monk, who do promise to live and die with the City, and for the honour of the City; and indeed the City is very openhanded to the soldiers, that they are most of them drunk all day, and have money given them. He did give me something for my mouth which I did use this night.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-02-24" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-02-24">14th</time>. Called out in the morning by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore, whose voice my wife hearing in my dressing-chamber with me, got herself ready, and came down and challenged him for her valentine, this being the day.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-226" id="noteref-226" epub:type="noteref">226</a> To Westminster Hall, there being many new remonstrances and declarations from many counties to Monk and the City, and one coming from the North from Sir Thomas Fairfax.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-227" id="noteref-227" epub:type="noteref">227</a> Hence I took him to the Swan and gave him his morning draft. So to my office, where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hill of Worcestershire came to see me and my partner in our office, with whom we went to Will’s to drink. At noon I went home and so to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s, but they had dined, and so I went to see <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jem where I stayed a while, and home again where I stayed an hour or two at my lute, and so forth to Westminster Hall, where I heard that the Parliament hath now changed the oath so much talked of to a promise; and that among other qualifications for the members that are to be chosen, one is, that no man, nor the son of any man that hath been in arms during the life of the father, shall be capable of being chosen to sit in Parliament. To Will’s, where like a fool I staid and lost 6<abbr class="currency">d.</abbr> at cards. So home, and wrote a letter to my Lord by the post. So after supper to bed. This day, by an order of the House, Sir <abbr class="name">H.</abbr> Vane<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-228" id="noteref-228" epub:type="noteref">228</a> was sent out of town to his house in Lincolnshire.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-02-25" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-02-25">15th</time>. Called up in the morning by Captain Holland and Captain Cuttance,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-229" id="noteref-229" epub:type="noteref">229</a> and with them to Harper’s, thence to my office, thence with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hill of Worcestershire to Will’s, where I gave him a letter to Nan Pepys,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-230" id="noteref-230" epub:type="noteref">230</a> and some merry pamphlets against the Rump to carry to her into the country. So to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s, where the dining room being full, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Walgrave<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-231" id="noteref-231" epub:type="noteref">231</a> and I dined below in the buttery by ourselves upon a good dish of buttered salmon. Thence to Hering<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-232" id="noteref-232" epub:type="noteref">232</a> the merchant about my Lord’s Worcester money and back to Paul’s Churchyard, where I staid reading in Fuller’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of the Church of England</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-233" id="noteref-233" epub:type="noteref">233</a> an hour or two, and so to my father’s, where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hill came to me and I gave him direction what to do at Worcester about the money. Thence to my Lady Wright’s and gave her a letter from my Lord privily. So to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jem and sat with her, who dined at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s today, and told me that there was at her coming away at least forty gentlemen (I suppose members that were secluded, for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Walgrave told me that there were about thirty met there the last night) came dropping in one after another thither. Thence home and wrote into the country against tomorrow by the carrier and so to bed. At my father’s I heard how my cousin Kate Joyce<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-234" id="noteref-234" epub:type="noteref">234</a> had a fall yesterday from her horse and had some hurt thereby. No news today, but all quiet to see what the Parliament will do about the issuing of the writs tomorrow for filling up of the House, according to Monk’s desire.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-02-26" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-02-26">16th</time>. In the morning at my lute. Then came Shaw and Hawly, and I gave them their morning draft at my house. So to my office, where I wrote by the carrier to my Lord and sealed my letter at Will’s, and gave it old East to carry it to the carrier’s, and to take up a box of china oranges and two little barrels of scallops at my house, which Captain Cuttance sent to me for my Lord. Here I met with Osborne<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-235" id="noteref-235" epub:type="noteref">235</a> and with Shaw and Spicer, and we went to the Sun Tavern in expectation of a dinner, where we had sent us only two trenchers-full of meat, at which we were very merry, while in came <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wade and his friend <abbr>Capt.</abbr> Moyse (who told us of his hopes to get an estate merely for his name’s sake), and here we staid till seven at night, I winning a quart of sack of Shaw that one trencherfull that was sent us was all lamb and he that it was veal. I by having but 3<abbr class="currency">d.</abbr> in my pocket made shift to spend no more, whereas if I had had more I had spent more as the rest did, so that I see it is an advantage to a man to carry little in his pocket. Home, and after supper, and a little at my flute, I went to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-02-27" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-02-27">17th</time>. In the morning Tom that was my Lord’s footboy came to see me and had 10<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> of me of the money which I have to keep of his. So that now I have but 35<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> more of his. Then came <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hills the instrument maker, and I consulted with him about the altering my lute and my viall. After that I went into my study and did up my accounts, and found that I am about £40 beforehand in the world, and that is all. So to my office and from thence brought <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hawly home with me to dinner, and after dinner wrote a letter to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing about his business and gave it Hawly, and so went to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gunning’s to his weekly fast, and after sermon, meeting there with Monsieur L’Impertinent, we went and walked in the park till it was dark. I played on my pipe at the Echo, and then drank a cup of ale at Jacob’s. So to Westminster Hall, and he with me, where I heard that some of the members of the House were gone to meet with some of the secluded members and General Monk in the City. Hence we went to White Hall, thinking to hear more news, where I met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hunt, who told me how Monk had sent for all his goods that he had here into the City; and yet again he told me, that some of the members of the House had this day laid in firing into their lodgings at White Hall for a good while, so that we are at a great stand to think what will become of things, whether Monk will stand to the Parliament or no. Hence <abbr>Mons.</abbr> L’Impertinent and I to Harper’s, and there drank a cup or two to the King, and to his fair sister Frances’<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-236" id="noteref-236" epub:type="noteref">236</a> good health, of whom we had much discourse of her not being much the worse for the small pox, which she had this last summer. So home and to bed. This day we are invited to my uncle Fenner’s wedding feast, but went not, this being the 27th year.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-02-28" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-02-28">18th</time>. A great while at my vial and voice, learning to sing “Fly boy, fly boy,” without book. So to my office, where little to do. In the Hall I met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Eglin and one Looker, a famous gardener, servant to my Lord Salsbury, and among other things the gardener told a strange passage in good earnest. … Home to dinner, and then went to my Lord’s lodgings to my turret there and took away most of my books, and sent them home by my maid. Thither came <abbr>Capt.</abbr> Holland to me who took me to the Half Moon tavern and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Southorne, Blackburne’s clerk. Thence he took me to the Mitre in Fleet Street, where we heard (in a room over the music room) very plainly through the ceiling. Here we parted and I to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wotton’s, and with him to an alehouse and drank while he told me a great many stories of comedies that he had formerly seen acted, and the names of the principal actors, and gave me a very good account of it. Thence to Whitehall, where I met with Luellin and in the clerk’s chamber wrote a letter to my Lord. So home and to bed. This day two soldiers were hanged in the Strand for their late mutiny at Somerset-house.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-237" id="noteref-237" epub:type="noteref">237</a></p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-02-29" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-02-29">19th (Lord’s day)</time>. Early in the morning I set my books that I brought home yesterday up in order in my study. Thence forth to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harper’s to drink a draft of purle<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-238" id="noteref-238" epub:type="noteref">238</a> whither by appointment Monsieur L’Impertinent, who did intend too upon my desire to go along with me to <abbr>St.</abbr> Bartholomew’s, to hear one <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sparks, but it raining very hard we went to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gunning’s and heard an excellent sermon, and speaking of the character that the Scripture gives of Ann the mother of the blessed Virgin, he did there speak largely in commendation of widowhood, and not as we do to marry two or three wives or husbands, one after another. Here I met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore, and went home with him to dinner, where he told me the discourse that happened between the secluded members and the members of the House, before Monk last Friday. How the secluded said, that they did not intend by coming in to express revenge upon these men, but only to meet and dissolve themselves, and only to issue writs for a free Parliament. He told me how Haselrigge was afraid to have the candle carried before him, for fear that the people seeing him, would do him hurt; and that he is afraid to appear in the City. That there is great likelihood that the secluded members will come in, and so <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew and my Lord are likely to be great men, at which I was very glad. After diner there was many secluded members come in to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew, which, it being the Lord’s day, did make <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore believe that there was something extraordinary in the business. Hence home and brought my wife to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mossum’s to hear him, and indeed he made a very good sermon, but only too eloquent for a pulpit. Here <abbr>Mr.</abbr> L’Impertinent helped me to a seat. After sermon to my father’s; and fell in discourse concerning our going to Cambridge the next week with my brother John. To <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Turner where her brother, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Edward Pepys, was there, and I sat a great while talking of public business of the times with him. So to supper to my Father’s, all supper talking of John’s going to Cambridge. So home, and it raining my wife got my mother’s French mantle and my brother John’s hat, and so we went all along home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-03-01" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-03-01">20th</time>. In the morning at my lute. Then to my office, where my partner and I made even our balance. Took him home to dinner with me, where my brother John came to dine with me. After dinner I took him to my study at home and at my Lord’s, and gave him some books and other things against his going to Cambridge. After he was gone I went forth to Westminster Hall, where I met with Chetwind, Simons, and Gregory.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-239" id="noteref-239" epub:type="noteref">239</a> And with them to Marsh’s at Whitehall to drink, and staid there a pretty while reading a pamphlet well writ and directed to General Monk, in praise of the form of monarchy which was settled here before the wars.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-240" id="noteref-240" epub:type="noteref">240</a> They told me how the Speaker Lenthall do refuse to sign the writs for choice of new members in the place of the excluded; and by that means the writs could not go out today. In the evening Simons and I to the Coffee Club, where nothing to do only I heard <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harrington, and my Lord of Dorset and another Lord, talking of getting another place as the Cockpit, and they did believe it would come to something. After a small debate upon the question whether learned or unlearned subjects are the best the Club broke up very poorly, and I do not think they will meet any more. Hence with Vines, <abbr>etc.</abbr> to Will’s, and after a pot or two home, and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-03-02" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-03-02">21st</time>. In the morning going out I saw many soldiers going towards Westminster, and was told that they were going to admit the secluded members again. So I to Westminster Hall, and in Chancery Row<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-241" id="noteref-241" epub:type="noteref">241</a> I saw about twenty of them who had been at White Hall with General Monk, who came thither this morning, and made a speech to them, and recommended to them a Commonwealth, and against Charles Stuart.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-242" id="noteref-242" epub:type="noteref">242</a> They came to the House and went in one after another, and at last the Speaker came. But it is very strange that this could be carried so private, that the other members of the House heard nothing of all this, till they found them in the House, insomuch that the soldiers that stood there to let in the secluded members, they took for such as they had ordered to stand there to hinder their coming in. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Prin<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-243" id="noteref-243" epub:type="noteref">243</a> came with an old basket-hilt sword on, and had a great many great shouts upon his going into the Hall. They sat till noon, and at their coming out <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew saw me, and bid me come to his house, which I did, and he would have me dine with him, which I did; and he very joyful told me that the House had made General Monk, General of all the Forces in England, Scotland, and Ireland; and that upon Monk’s desire, for the service that Lawson had lately done in pulling down the Committee of Safety, he had the command of the Sea for the time being. He advised me to send for my Lord forthwith, and told me that there is no question that, if he will, he may now be employed again; and that the House do intend to do nothing more than to issue writs, and to settle a foundation for a free Parliament. After dinner I back to Westminster Hall with him in his coach. Here I met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lock and Pursell, Masters of Music<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-244" id="noteref-244" epub:type="noteref">244</a> and with them to the Coffee House, into a room next the water, by ourselves, where we spent an hour or two till Captain Taylor came to us, who told us, that the House had voted the gates of the City to be made up again, and the members of the City<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-245" id="noteref-245" epub:type="noteref">245</a> that are in prison to be set at liberty; and that Sir <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Booth’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-246" id="noteref-246" epub:type="noteref">246</a> case be brought into the House tomorrow. Here we had variety of brave Italian and Spanish songs, and a canon for eight voices, which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lock had lately made on these words: <i xml:lang="la">Domine salvum fac Regem</i>, an admirable thing. Here also <abbr>Capt.</abbr> Taylor began a discourse of something that he had lately writ about Gavelkind<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-247" id="noteref-247" epub:type="noteref">247</a> in answer to one that had wrote a piece upon the same subject; and indeed discovered a great deal of study in antiquity in his discourse. Here out of the window it was a most pleasant sight to see the City from one end to the other with a glory about it, so high was the light of the bonfires, and so thick round the City, and the bells rang everywhere. Hence home and wrote to my Lord, afterwards came down and found <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hunt (troubled at this change) and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Spong, who staid late with me singing of a song or two, and so parted. My wife not very well, went to bed before. This morning I met in the Hall with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fuller, of Christ’s, and told him of my design to go to Cambridge, and whither. He told me very freely the temper of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Widdrington, how he did oppose all the fellows in the College, and that there was a great distance between him and the rest, at which I was very sorry, for that he told me he feared it would be little to my brother’s advantage to be his pupil.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-03-03" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-03-03">22nd</time>. In the morning intended to have gone to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s to borrow some money, but it raining I forbore, and went to my Lord’s lodging and look that all things were well there. Then home and sang a song to my viall, so to my office and to Will’s, where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierce found me out, and told me that he would go with me to Cambridge, where Colonel Ayre’s regiment, to which he was surgeon, lieth. Walking in the Hall, I saw Major-General Brown,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-248" id="noteref-248" epub:type="noteref">248</a> who had along time been banished by the Rump, but now with his beard overgrown, he comes abroad and sat in the House. To my father’s to dinner, where nothing but a small dish of powdered beef<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-249" id="noteref-249" epub:type="noteref">249</a> and dish of carrots; they being all busy to get things ready for my brother John to go tomorrow. After dinner, my wife staying there, I went to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s, and got £5 of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Andrews, and so to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jemimah, who now hath her instrument about her neck, and indeed is infinitely, altered, and holds her head upright.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-250" id="noteref-250" epub:type="noteref">250</a> I paid her maid 40<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> of the money that I have received of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Andrews. Hence home to my study, where I only wrote thus much of this day’s passages to this * and so out again. To White Hall, where I met with <abbr class="name">Will.</abbr> Simons and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mabbot at Marsh’s, who told me how the House had this day voted that the gates of the City should be set up at the cost of the State. And that Major-General Brown’s being proclaimed a traitor be made void, and several other things of that nature. Home for my lanthorn and so to my father’s, where I directed John what books to put for Cambridge. After that to supper, where my Uncle Fenner and my Aunt, <abbr class="name">The.</abbr> Turner, and Joyce, at a brave leg of veal roasted, and were very merry against John’s going to Cambridge. I observed this day how abominably Barebone’s windows are broke again last night. At past 9 o’clock my wife and I went home.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-03-04" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-03-04">23rd</time>. Thursday, my birthday, now twenty-seven years. A pretty fair morning, I rose and after writing a while in my study I went forth. To my office, where I told <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hawly of my thoughts to go out of town tomorrow. Hither <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fuller comes to me and my Uncle Thomas too, thence I took them to drink, and so put off my uncle. So with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fuller home to my house, where he dined with me, and he told my wife and me a great many stories of his adversities, since these troubles, in being forced to travel in the Catholic countries, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> He showed me his bills, but I had not money to pay him. We parted, and I to Whitehall, where I was to see my horse which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Garthwayt lends me tomorrow. So home, where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierce comes to me about appointing time and place where and when to meet tomorrow. So to Westminster Hall, where, after the House rose, I met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew, who told me that my Lord was chosen by 73 voices, to be one of the Council of State. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierpoint<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-251" id="noteref-251" epub:type="noteref">251</a> had the most, 101, and himself the next, too. He brought me in the coach home. He and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Anslow being in it. I back to the Hall, and at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Michell’s shop staid talking a great while with her and my Chaplain, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mumford, and drank a pot or two of ale on a wager that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Prin is not of the Council. Home and wrote to my Lord the news of the choice of the Council by the post, and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-03-05" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-03-05">24th</time>. I rose very early, and taking horse at Scotland Yard, at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Garthwayt’s stable, I rode to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierces, who rose, and in a quarter of an hour, leaving his wife in bed (with whom <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lucy methought was very free as she lay in bed), we both mounted, and so set forth about seven of the clock, the day and the way very foul. About Ware we overtook <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blayton, brother-in-law to Dick Vines, who went thenceforwards with us, and at Puckeridge we baited, where we had a loin of mutton fried, and were very merry, but the way exceeding bad from Ware thither. Then up again and as far as Foulmer, within six miles of Cambridge, my mare being almost tired: here we lay at the Chequer, playing at cards till supper, which was a breast of veal roasted. I lay with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierce, who we left here the next morning upon his going to Hinchingbroke to speak with my Lord before his going to London, and we two come to Cambridge by eight o’clock in the morning.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-03-06" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-03-06">25th</time>. To the Falcon,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-252" id="noteref-252" epub:type="noteref">252</a> in the Petty Cury,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-253" id="noteref-253" epub:type="noteref">253</a> where we found my father and brother very well. After dressing myself, about ten o’clock, my father, brother, and I to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Widdririgton, at Christ’s College, who received us very civilly, and caused my brother to be admitted,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-254" id="noteref-254" epub:type="noteref">254</a> while my father, he, and I, sat talking. After that done, we take leave. My father and brother went to visit some friends, Pepys’s, scholars in Cambridge,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-255" id="noteref-255" epub:type="noteref">255</a> while I went to Magdalene College, to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hill,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-256" id="noteref-256" epub:type="noteref">256</a> with whom I found <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Zanchy,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-257" id="noteref-257" epub:type="noteref">257</a> Burton,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-258" id="noteref-258" epub:type="noteref">258</a> and Hollins, and was exceeding civilly received by them. I took leave on promise to sup with them, and to my Inn again, where I dined with some others that were there at an ordinary. After dinner my brother to the College, and my father and I to my Cozen Angier’s,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-259" id="noteref-259" epub:type="noteref">259</a> to see them, where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fairbrother<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-260" id="noteref-260" epub:type="noteref">260</a> came to us. Here we sat a while talking. My father he went to look after his things at the carrier’s, and my brother’s chamber, while <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fairbrother, my Cozen Angier, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Zanchy, whom I met at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Merton’s shop (where I bought <i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet" xml:lang="it">Elenchus Motuum</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-261" id="noteref-261" epub:type="noteref">261</a> having given my former to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing when he was here), to the Three Tuns, where we drank pretty hard and many healths to the King, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, till it began to be darkish: then we broke up and I and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Zanchy went to Magdalene College, where a very handsome supper at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hill’s chambers, I suppose upon a club among them, where in their discourse I could find that there was nothing at all left of the old preciseness in their discourse, specially on Saturday nights. And <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Zanchy told me that there was no such thing nowadays among them at any time. After supper and some discourse then to my Inn, where I found my father in his chamber, and after some discourse, and he well satisfied with this day’s work, we went to bed, my brother lying with me, his things not being come by the carrier that he could not lie in the College.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-03-07" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-03-07">26th (Sunday)</time>. My brother went to the College to Chapel. My father and I went out in the morning, and walked out in the fields behind King’s College, and in King’s College Chapel Yard, where we met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fairbrother, who took us to Botolph’s Church, where we heard <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Nicholas, of Queen’s College, who I knew in my time to be Tripos,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-262" id="noteref-262" epub:type="noteref">262</a> with great applause, upon this text, “For thy commandments are broad.” Thence my father and I to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Widdrington’s chamber to dinner, where he used us very courteously again, and had two Fellow Commoners at table with him, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pepper, a Fellow of the College. After dinner, while we sat talking by the fire, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierces man came to tell me that his master was come to town, so my father and I took leave, and found <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierce at our Inn, who told us that he had lost his journey, for my Lord was gone from Hinchingbroke to London on Thursday last, at which I was a little put to a stand. So after a cup of drink I went to Magdalene College to get the certificate of the College for my brother’s entrance there, that he might save his year. I met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Burton in the Court, who took me to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pechell’s chamber,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-263" id="noteref-263" epub:type="noteref">263</a> where he was and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Zanchy. By and by, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pechell and Sanchy and I went out, Pechell to Church, Sanchy and I to the Rose Tavern,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-264" id="noteref-264" epub:type="noteref">264</a> where we sat and drank till sermon done, and then <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pechell came to us, and we three sat drinking the King’s and his whole family’s health till it began to be dark. Then we parted; Sanchy and I went to my lodging, where we found my father and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierce at the door, and I took them both and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blayton to the Rose Tavern, and there gave them a quart or two of wine, not telling them that we had been there before. After this we broke up, and my father, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Zanchy, and I to my Cosen Angier to supper, where I caused two bottles of wine to be carried from the Rose Tavern; that was drunk up, and I had not the wit to let them know at table that it was I that paid for them, and so I lost my thanks for them. After supper <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fairbrother, who supped there with us, took me into a room by himself, and showed me a pitiful copy of verses upon <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Prinn which he esteemed very good, and desired that I would get them given to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Prinn, in hopes that he would get him some place for it, which I said I would do, but did laugh in my sleeve to think of his folly, though indeed a man that has always expressed great civility to me. After that we sat down and talked; I took leave of all my friends, and so to my Inn, where after I had wrote a note and enclosed the certificate to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Widdrington, I bade good night to my father, and John went to bed, but I staid up a little while, playing the fool with the lass of the house at the door of the chamber, and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-03-08" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-03-08">27th</time>. Up by four o’clock, and after I was ready, took my leave of my father, whom I left in bed, and the same of my brother John, to whom I gave 10<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blayton and I took horse and straight to Saffron Walden, where at the White Hart, we set up our horses, and took the master of the house to show us Audley End House,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-265" id="noteref-265" epub:type="noteref">265</a> who took us on foot through the park, and so to the house, where the housekeeper showed us all the house, in which the stateliness of the ceilings, chimneypieces, and form of the whole was exceedingly worth seeing. He took us into the cellar, where we drank most admirable drink, a health to the King. Here I played on my flageolette, there being an excellent echo. He showed us excellent pictures; two especially, those of the four Evangelists and Henry <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>. After that I gave the man 2<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> for his trouble, and went back again. In our going, my landlord carried us through a very old hospital or almshouse, where forty poor people was maintained; a very old foundation; and over the chimney in the mantelpiece was an inscription in brass: “<i xml:lang="la">Orate pro animâ Thomæ Bird</i>,” <abbr>etc.</abbr>;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-266" id="noteref-266" epub:type="noteref">266</a> and the poor box also was on the same chimneypiece, with an iron door and locks to it, into which I put 6<abbr class="currency eoc">d.</abbr> They brought me a draft of their drink in a brown bowl, tipt with silver, which I drank off, and at the bottom was a picture of the Virgin and the child in her arms, done in silver. So we went to our Inn, and after eating of something, and kissed the daughter of the house, she being very pretty, we took leave, and so that night, the road pretty good, but the weather rainy to Ep[p]ing, where we sat and played a game at cards, and after supper, and some merry talk with a plain bold maid of the house, we went to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-03-09" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-03-09">28th</time>. Up in the morning, and had some red herrings to our breakfast, while my boot-heel was a-mending, by the same token the boy left the hole as big as it was before. Then to horse, and for London through the forest, where we found the way good, but only in one path, which we kept as if we had rode through a canal all the way. We found the shops all shut, and the militia of the red regiment in arms at the Old Exchange,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-267" id="noteref-267" epub:type="noteref">267</a> among whom I found and spoke to <abbr class="name">Nich.</abbr> Osborne, who told me that it was a thanksgiving-day through the City for the return of the Parliament. At Paul’s I light, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blayton holding my horse, where I found <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Reynolds<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-268" id="noteref-268" epub:type="noteref">268</a> in the pulpit, and General Monk there, who was to have a great entertainment at Grocers’ Hall.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-269" id="noteref-269" epub:type="noteref">269</a> So home, where my wife and all well. Shifted myself<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-270" id="noteref-270" epub:type="noteref">270</a> and so to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s, and then to Sir Harry Wright’s, where I found my Lord at dinner, who called for me in, and was glad to see me. There was at dinner also <abbr>Mr.</abbr> John Wright and his lady, a very pretty lady, Alderman Allen’s daughter. I dined here with <abbr class="name">Will.</abbr> Howe,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-271" id="noteref-271" epub:type="noteref">271</a> and after dinner went out with him to buy a hat (calling in my way and saw my mother), which we did at the Plough in Fleet Street by my Lord’s direction, but not as for him. Here we met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierce a little before, and he took us to the Greyhound Tavern,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-272" id="noteref-272" epub:type="noteref">272</a> and gave us a pint of wine, and as the rest of the seamen do, talked very high again of my Lord. After we had done about the hat we went homewards, he to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s and I to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jem, and sat with her a little. Then home, where I found <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply, almost drunk, come to see me, afterwards <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Spong comes, with whom I went up and played with him a Duo or two, and so good night. I was indeed a little vexed with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply, but said nothing, about his breaking open of my study at my house, merely to give him the key of the stair door at my Lord’s, which lock he might better have broke than mine.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-03-10" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-03-10">29th</time>. To my office, and drank at Will’s with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore, who told me how my Lord is chosen General at Sea by the Council, and that it is thought that Monk will be joined with him therein. Home and dined, after dinner my wife and I by water to London, and thence to Herring’s, the merchant in Coleman Street, about £50 which he promises I shall have on Saturday next. So to my mother’s, and then to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Turner’s, of whom I took leave, and her company, because she was to go out of town tomorrow with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pepys into Norfolk. Here my cosen Norton<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-273" id="noteref-273" epub:type="noteref">273</a> gave me a brave cup of metheglin,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-274" id="noteref-274" epub:type="noteref">274</a> the first I ever drank. To my mother’s and supped there. She showed me a letter to my father from my uncle inviting him to come to Brampton while he is in the country. So home and to bed. This day my Lord came to the House, the first time since he came to town; but he had been at the Council before.</p>
			</article>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
