<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>April 1669</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-112" epub:type="chapter z3998:diary">
			<h2 epub:type="title">April 1669</h2>
			<article id="entry-1669-4-11" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1669-04-11">April 1st</time>. Up, and with Colonel Middleton, at the desire of Rear-Admiral Kempthorne, the President, for our assisting them, to the Court-martiall on board a yacht in the River here, to try the business of the Purser’s complaints, Baker against Trevanion, his Commander, of <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">The Dartmouth</i>. But, Lord! to see what wretched doings there were among all the Commanders to ruin the Purser, and defend the Captain in all his rogueries, be it to the prejudice of the King or Purser, no good man could bear! I confess I was pretty high, which did not at least the young gentlemen Commanders like; and Middleton did the like. But could not bring it to any issue this day, sitting till two o’clock; and therefore we being sent for, went to Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn’s by invitation to dine; where my wife was, and my Lord Brouncker and his mistress, and Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes and his niece; and here a bad dinner, and little mirth, I being little pleased with my host. However, I made myself sociable; and so, after dinner, my wife and I, with my Lord Brouncker and his mistress, they set us down at my cousin Turner’s, and there we stayed awhile and talked; and particularly here we met with <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Ball,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4471" id="noteref-4471" epub:type="noteref">4471</a> the Parson of the Temple, who did tell me a great many pretty stories about the manner of the Parsons being paid for their preaching at Paul’s heretofore, and now, and the ground of the Lecture, and heretofore the names of the founders thereof, which were many, at some 5<abbr>s.</abbr>, some 6<abbr>s.</abbr> per annum towards it: and had their names read in the pulpit every sermon among those holy persons that the Church do order a collect for, giving God thanks for. By and by comes by my desire Commissioner Middleton’s coach and horses for us, and we went with it towards the Park, thinking to have met <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">The.</abbr> Turner and Betty, but did not; so turned back again to their lodging, and there found them and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Batelier, and there, after a little talk, we took leave, and carry Batelier home with us. So to supper, and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1669-4-12" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1669-04-12">2nd</time>. Up, and by water to Whitehall, and there with the Office attended the Duke of York, and stayed in Whitehall till about noon, and so with <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Hewer to the Cocke, and there he and I dined alone with great content, he reading to me, for my memory’s sake, my late collections of the history of the Navy, that I might represent the same by and by to the Duke of York; and so, after dinner, he and I to Whitehall, and there to the Duke of York’s lodgings, whither he, by and by, by his appointment come: and alone with him an hour in his closet, telling him mine and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Coventry’s advice touching the present posture of the Navy, as the Duke of Buckingham and the rest do now labour to make changes therein; and that it were best for him to suffer the King to be satisfied with the bringing in of a man or two which they desire. I did also give the Duke of York a short account of the history of the Navy, as to our Office, wherewith he was very well satisfied: but I do find that he is pretty stiff against their bringing in of men against his mind, as the Treasures were, and particularly against Child’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4472" id="noteref-4472" epub:type="noteref">4472</a> coming in, because he is a merchant. After much discourse with him, we parted; and [he to] the Council, while I stayed waiting for his telling me when I should be ready to give him a written account of the administration of the Navy. This caused me to wait the whole afternoon, till night. In the meantime, stepping to the Duchess of York’s side to speak with Lady Peterborough; I did see the young Duchess,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4473" id="noteref-4473" epub:type="noteref">4473</a> a little child in hanging sleeves, dance most finely, so as almost to ravish me, her ears were so good: taught by a Frenchman that did heretofore teach the King, and all the King’s children, and the Queen-Mother herself, who do still dance well. Thence to the council door and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Chevins took me into the back stairs, and they with his friend, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fowkes, for whom he is very solicitous in some things depending in this Office, he did make me, with some others that he took in (among others, Alderman Backewell), eat a pickled herring, the largest I ever saw, and drink variety of wines till I was almost merry; but I did keep in good tune; and so, after the Council was up, I home; and there find my wife not yet come home from Deptford, where she hath been all this day to see her mother, but she come and by, and so to talk, and supper, and to bed. This night I did bring home from the King’s potticary’s, in Whitehall by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cooling’s direction, a water that he says did him mighty good for his eyes. I pray God it may do me good; but, by his description, his disease was the same as mine, and this do encourage me to use it.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1669-4-13" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1669-04-13">3rd</time>. Up, and to the Council of War again, with Middleton: but the proceedings of the Commanders so devilishly bad, and so professedly partial to the Captain, that I could endure it no longer, but took occasion to pretend business at the Office, and away, and Colonel Middleton with me, who was of the same mind, and resolved to declare our minds freely to the Duke of York about it. So to the office, where we sat all the morning. Then home to dinner, and so back to the office, where busy late till night, and so home to supper and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1669-4-14" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1669-04-14">4th (Lord’s day)</time>. Up, and to church, where Alderman Backewell’s wife, by my invitation with my head, come up with her mother, and sat with us, and after sermon I did walk with them home, and there left them, and home to dinner, and after dinner with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T.</abbr> Middleton to Whitehall, by appointment; and at my Lord Arlington’s the Office did attend the King and Cabal, to discourse the further quantity of victuals fit to be declared for, which was 2,000 men for six months; and so without more ado or stay, there, hearing no news but that Sir Thomas Allen is to be expected every hour at home with his fleet, or news of his being gone back to Algier, and so home, where got my wife to read to me; and so after supper to bed. The Queen-Mother hath been of late mighty ill, and some fears of her death.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1669-4-15" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1669-04-15">5th</time>. Up, and by coach, it being very cold, to Whitehall, expecting a meeting of Tangier, but it did not. But, however, did wait there all the morning, and, among other things, I spent a little time with Creed walking in the garden, and talking about our Office, and Child’s coming in to be a Commissioner; and, being his friend, I did think he might do me a kindness to learn of him what the Duke of Buckingham and the faction do design touching me, and to instil good words concerning me, which he says, and I believe he will: and it is but necessary; for I have not a mind indeed at this time to be put out of my Office, if I can make any shift that is honourable to keep it; but I will not do it by deserting the Duke of York. At noon by appointment comes <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheres, and he and I to Unthanke’s, where my wife stays for us in our coach, and Betty Turner with her; and we to the Mulberry Garden, where Sheres is to treat us with a Spanish Olio,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4474" id="noteref-4474" epub:type="noteref">4474</a> by a cook of his acquaintance that is there, that was with my Lord in Spain: and without any other company, he did do it, and mighty nobly; and the Olio was indeed a very noble dish, such as I never saw better, or any more of. This, and the discourse he did give us of Spain, and description of the Escuriall, was a fine treat. So we left other good things, that would keep till night, for a collation; and, with much content, took coach again, and went five or six miles towards Branford,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4475" id="noteref-4475" epub:type="noteref">4475</a> the Prince of Tuscany,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4476" id="noteref-4476" epub:type="noteref">4476</a> who comes into England only to spend money and see our country, comes into the town today, and is much expected; and we met him, but the coach passing by apace, we could not see much of him but he seems a very jolly and good comely man. By the way, we overtook Captain Ferrers upon his fine Spanish horse, and he is a fine horse indeed; but not so good, I think, as I have seen some. He did ride by us most of the way, and with us to the Park, and there left us, where we passed the evening, and meeting <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">The.</abbr> Turner, Talbot, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batelier, and his sister, in a coach, we anon took them with us to the Mulberry Garden; and there, after a walk, to supper upon what was left at noon; and very good; only <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheres being taken suddenly ill for a while, did spoil our mirth; but by and by was well again, and we mighty merry: and so broke up, and left him at Charing Cross, and so calling only at my cousin Turner’s, away home, mightily pleased with the day’s work, and this day come another new maid, for a middle maid, but her name I know not yet; and, for a cook-maid, we have, ever since Bridget went, used a blackmoore of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Batelier’s, Doll, who dresses our meat mighty well, and we mightily pleased with her. So by and by to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1669-4-16" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1669-04-16">6th</time>. Up, and to the Office, and thence to the Excise Office about some business, and so back to the office and sat till late, and thence to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Batelier’s to dinner, where my cousin Turner and both her daughters, and Talbot Pepys and my wife, and a mighty fine dinner. They at dinner before I come; and, when I had dined, I away home, and thence to Whitehall, where the Board waited on the Duke of York to discourse about the disposing of Sir Thomas Allen’s fleet, which is newly come home to Portsmouth; and here Middleton and I did in plain terms acquaint the Duke of York what we thought and had observed in the late Court-martiall, which the Duke did give ear to; and though he thinks not fit to revoke what is already done in this case by a Court-martiall, yet it shall bring forth some good laws in the behaviour of Captains to their under Officers for the time to come. Thence home, and there, after a while at the Office, I home, and there come home my wife, who hath been with Batelier’s late, and been dancing with the company, at which I seemed a little troubled, not being sent for thither myself, but I was not much so, but went to bed well enough pleased.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1669-4-17" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1669-04-17">7th</time>. Up, and by coach to my cousin Turner’s, and invited them to dine at the Cocke today, with my wife and me; and so to the Lords of the Treasury, where all the morning, and settled matters to their liking about the assignments on the Customes, between the Navy Office and Victualler, and to that end spent most of the morning there with <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D.</abbr> Gawden, and thence took him to the Cocke, and there left him and my clerk Gibson together evening their reckonings, while I to the New Exchange to talk with Betty,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4477" id="noteref-4477" epub:type="noteref">4477</a> my little sempstress; and so to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Turner’s, to call them to dinner, but my wife not come, I back again, and was overtaken by a porter, with a message from my wife that she was ill, and could not come to us: so I back again to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Turner’s, and find them gone; and so back again to the Cocke, and there find <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turner, Betty, and Talbot Pepys, and they dined with myself Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">D.</abbr> Gawden and Gibson, and mighty merry, this house being famous for good meat, and particularly pease-porridge and after dinner broke up, and they away; and I to the Council-Chamber, and there heard the great complaint of the City, tried against the gentlemen of the Temple, for the late riot, as they would have it, when my Lord Mayor was there. But, upon hearing the whole business, the City was certainly to blame to charge them in this manner as with a riot: but the King and Council did forbear to determine anything it, till the other business of the title and privilege be decided which is now under dispute at law between them, whether Temple be within the liberty of the City or no.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4478" id="noteref-4478" epub:type="noteref">4478</a> But I, sorry to see the City so ill advised as to complain in a thing where their proofs were so weak. Thence to my cousin Turner’s, and thence with her and her daughters, and her sister Turner, I carrying Betty in my lap, to Talbot’s chamber at the Temple, where, by agreement, the poor rogue had a pretty dish of anchovies and sweetmeats for them; and hither come <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Eden,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4479" id="noteref-4479" epub:type="noteref">4479</a> who was in his mistress’s disfavour ever since the other night that he come in thither fuddled, when we were there. But I did make them friends by my buffoonery, and bringing up a way of spelling their names, and making Theophila spell Lamton, which <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">The.</abbr> would have to be the name of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Eden’s mistress, and mighty merry we were till late, and then I by coach home, and so to bed, my wife being ill of those, but well enough pleased with my being with them. This day I do hear that Betty Turner is to be left at school at Hackney, which I am mightily pleased with; for then I shall, now and then, see her. She is pretty, and a girl for that, and her relations, I love.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1669-4-18" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1669-04-18">8th</time>. Up, and to Whitehall, to the King’s side, to find Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T.</abbr> Clifford, where the Duke of York come and found me, which I was sorry for, for fear he should think I was making friends on that side. But I did put it off the best I could, my being there: and so, by and by, had opportunity alone to show Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T.</abbr> Clifford the fair account I had drawn up of the Customes, which he liked, and seemed mightily pleased with me; and so away to the Excise-Office, to do a little business there, and so to the Office, where all the morning. At noon home to dinner, and then to the office again till the evening, and then with my wife by coach to Islington, to pay what we owe there, for the late dinner at Jane’s wedding; and so round by Kingsland and Hogsden<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4480" id="noteref-4480" epub:type="noteref">4480</a> home, pleased with my wife’s singing with me, by the way, and so to the office again a little, and then home to supper and to bed. Going this afternoon through Smithfield, I did see a coach run over the coachman’s neck, and stand upon it, and yet the man rose up, and was well after it, which I thought a wonder.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1669-4-19" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1669-04-19">9th</time>. Up, and by water to Whitehall, and there, with the Board, attended the Duke of York, and Sir Thomas Allen with us (who come to town yesterday); and it is resolved another fleet shall go to the Streights forthwith, and he command it. But his coming home is mighty hardly talked on by the merchants, for leaving their ships there to the mercy of the Turks: but of this more in my White-Booke. Thence out, and slipped out by water to Westminster Hall, and there thought to have spoke with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Martin, but she was not there, nor at home. So back again, and with <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Hewer by coach home and to dinner, and then to the office, and out again with <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Hewer to the Excise-Office, and to several places; among others, to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Faythorne’s, to have seen an instrument which he was said to have, for drawing perspectives, but he had it not: but here I did see his workhouse, and the best things of his doing he had by him, and so to other places, among others to Westminster Hall, and I took occasion to make a step to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Martin’s, the first time I have been with her since her husband went last to sea, which is I think a year since.⁠ ⁠… But, Lord! to hear how sillily she tells the story of her sister Doll’s being a widow and lately brought to bed, and her husband, one Rowland Powell, drowned, that was at sea with her husband, but by chance dead at sea, cast away. When God knows she hath played the whore, and is sillily forced at this time after she was brought to bed, to forge this story. Thence calling at several places by the way, we home, and there to the office, and then home to supper and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1669-4-20" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1669-04-20">10th</time>. Up, and to the Excise-Office, and thence to Whitehall a little, and so back again to the ’Change, but nobody there, it being over, and so walked home to dinner, and after dinner comes <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Seymour to visit me, a talking fellow: but I hear by him that Captain Trevanion<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4481" id="noteref-4481" epub:type="noteref">4481</a> do give it out everywhere, that I did overrule the whole Court-martiall against him, as long as I was there; and perhaps I may receive, this time, some wrong by it: but I care not, for what I did was out of my desire of doing justice. So the office, where late, and then home to supper and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1669-4-21" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1669-04-21">11th (Lord’s day</time>. Easter day). Up, and to Church; where Alderman Backewell’s wife, and mother, and boy, and another gentlewoman, did come, and sit in our pew; but no women of our own there, and so there was room enough. Our Parson made a dull sermon, and so home to dinner; and, after dinner, my wife and I out by coach, and Balty with us, to Loton,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4482" id="noteref-4482" epub:type="noteref">4482</a> the landscape-drawer, a Dutchman, living in <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s Market,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4483" id="noteref-4483" epub:type="noteref">4483</a> but there saw no good pictures. But by accident he did direct us to a painter that was then in the house with him, a Dutchman, newly come over, one Evarelst,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4484" id="noteref-4484" epub:type="noteref">4484</a> who took us to his lodging close by, and did show us a little flowerpot of his doing, the finest thing that ever, I think, I saw in my life; the drops of dew hanging on the leaves, so as I was forced, again and again, to put my finger to it, to feel whether my eyes were deceived or no. He do ask £70 for it: I had the vanity to bid him £20; but a better picture I never saw in my whole life; and it is worth going twenty miles to see it. Thence, leaving Balty there, I took my wife to <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s, and there carried her to the Queen’s Chapel, the first time I ever did it; and heard excellent music, but not so good as by accident I did hear there yesterday, as I went through the Park from Whitehall to see Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Coventry, which I have forgot to set down in my journal yesterday. And going out of the Chapel, I did see the Prince of Tuscany<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4485" id="noteref-4485" epub:type="noteref">4485</a> come out, a comely, black, fat man, in a mourning suit; and my wife and I did see him this afternoon through a window in this Chapel. All that Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Coventry yesterday did tell me new was, that the King would not yet give him leave to come to kiss his hand; and he do believe that he will not in a great while do it, till those about him shall see fit, which I am sorry for. Thence to the Park, my wife and I; and here Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Coventry did first see me and my wife in a coach of our own; and so did also this night the Duke of York, who did eye my wife mightily. But I begin to doubt that my being so much seen in my own coach at this time, may be observed to my prejudice; but I must venture it now. So home, and by night home, and so to my office, and there set down my journal, with the help of my left eye through my tube,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4486" id="noteref-4486" epub:type="noteref">4486</a> for fourteen days past; which is so much, as, I hope, I shall not run in arrear again, but the badness of my eyes do force me to it. So home to supper and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1669-4-22" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1669-04-22">12th</time>. Up, and by water to Whitehall, where I of the whole Office attended the Duke of York at his meeting with Sir Thomas Allen and several flag-officers, to consider of the manner of managing the war with Algiers; and, it being a thing I was wholly silent in, I did only observe; and find that their manner of discourse on this weighty affair was very mean and disorderly, the Duke of York himself being the man that I thought spoke most to the purpose. Having done here, I up and down the house, talking with this man and that, and then meeting <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheres, took him to see the fine flowerpot I saw yesterday, and did again offer £20 for it; but he [Verelst] insists upon £50. Thence I took him to <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s, but there was no music, but so walked to Whitehall, and, by and by to my wife at Unthanke’s, and with her was Jane, and so to the Cocke, where they, and I, and Sheres, and Tom dined, my wife having a great desire to eat of their soup made of peas, and dined very well, and thence by water to the Bear-Garden, and there happened to sit by Sir Fretcheville Hollis, who is still full of his vainglorious and profane talk. Here we saw a prize fought between a soldier and country fellow, one Warrell, who promised the least in his looks, and performed the most of valour in his boldness and evenness of mind, and smiles in all he did, that ever I saw and we were all both deceived and infinitely taken with him. He did soundly beat the soldier, and cut him over the head. Thence back to Whitehall, mightily pleased, all of us, with this sight, and particularly this fellow, as a most extraordinary man for his temper and evenness in fighting. And there leaving Sheres, we by our own coach home, and after sitting an hour, thrumming upon my viol, and singing, I to bed, and left my wife to do something to a waistcoat and petticoat she is to wear tomorrow. This evening, coming home, we overtook Alderman Backewell’s coach and his lady, and followed them to their house, and there made them the first visit, where they received us with extraordinary civility, and owning the obligation. But I do, contrary to my expectation, find her something a proud and vainglorious woman, in telling the number of her servants and family and expenses: he is also so, but he was ever of that strain. But here he showed me the model of his houses that he is going to build in Cornhill and Lombard Street; but he hath purchased so much there, that it looks like a little town, and must have cost him a great deal of money.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4487" id="noteref-4487" epub:type="noteref">4487</a></p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1669-4-23" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1669-04-23">13th</time>. Up, and at the Office a good while, and then, my wife going down the River to spend the day with her mother at Deptford, I abroad, and first to the milliner’s in Fenchurch Street, over against Rawlinson’s, and there, meeting both him and her in the shop, I bought a pair of gloves, and fell to talk, and found so much freedom that I stayed there the best part of the morning till towards noon, with great pleasure, it being a holiday, and then against my will away and to the ’Change, where I left <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Hewer, and I by hackney-coach to the Spittle,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4488" id="noteref-4488" epub:type="noteref">4488</a> and heard a piece of a dull sermon to my Lord Mayor and Aldermen, and thence saw them all take horse and ride away, which I have not seen together many a-day; their wives also went in their coaches; and, indeed, the sight was mighty pleasing. Thence took occasion to go back to this milliner’s [in Fenchurch Street], whose name I now understand to be Clerke; and there, her husband inviting me up to the balcony, to see the sight go by to dine at Clothworker’s-Hall,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4489" id="noteref-4489" epub:type="noteref">4489</a> I did go up and there saw it go by: and then, there being a good piece of cold roast beef upon the tables and one Margetts, a young merchant that lodges there, and is likely to marry a sister of hers, I stayed and eat, and had much good conversation with her, who hath the vanity to talk of her great friends and father, one Wingate, near Welling,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4490" id="noteref-4490" epub:type="noteref">4490</a> that hath been a Parliament-man. Here also was Stapely: the rope-merchant, and dined with us; and, after spending most of the afternoon also, I away home, and there sent for <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Hewer, and he and I by water to Whitehall to look among other things, for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> May, to unbespeak his dining with me tomorrow. But here being in the courtyard, God would have it, I spied <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Deb.</abbr>, which made my heart and head to work, and I presently could not refrain, but sent <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Hewer away to look for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wren (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Hewer, I perceive, did see her, but whether he did see me see her I know not, or suspect my sending him away I know not, but my heart could not hinder me), and I run after her and two women and a man, more ordinary people, and she in her old clothes, and after hunting a little, find them in the lobby of the chapel below stairs, and there I observed she endeavoured to avoid me, but I did speak to her and she to me, and did get her <i xml:lang="fr">pour dire</i> me <i xml:lang="fr">ou</i> she <i xml:lang="fr">demeurs</i> now, and did charge her <i xml:lang="fr">para</i> say nothing of me that I had <i xml:lang="fr">vu elle</i>, which she did promise, and so with my heart full of surprise and disorder I away, and meeting with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Cholmley walked into the Park with him and back again, looking to see if I could spy her again in the Park, but I could not. And so back to Whitehall, and then back to the Park with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> May, but could see her, no more, and so with <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Hewer, who I doubt by my countenance might see some disorder in me, we home by water, and there I find Talbot Pepys, and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Turner, and Betty, come to invite us to dinner on Thursday; and, after drinking, I saw them to the waterside, and so back home through Crutched Friars, and there saw Mary Mercer, and put off my hat to her, on the other side of the way, but it being a little darkish she did not, I think, know me well, and so to my office to put my papers in order, they having been removed for my closet to be made clean, and so home to my wife, who is come home from Deptford. But, God forgive me, I hardly know how to put on confidence enough to speak as innocent, having had this passage today with <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Deb.</abbr>, though only, God knows, by accident. But my great pain is lest God Almighty shall suffer me to find out this girl, whom indeed I love, and with a bad amour, but I will pray to God to give me grace to forbear it. So home to supper, where very sparing in my discourse, not giving occasion of any enquiry where I have been today, or what I have done, and so without any trouble tonight more than my fear, we to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1669-4-24" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1669-04-24">14th</time>. Up, and with <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Hewer to Whitehall, and there I did speak with the Duke of York, the Council sitting in the morning, and it was to direct me to have my business ready of the Administration of the Office against Saturday next, when the King would have a hearing of it. Thence home, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Hewer with me, and then out with my own coach to the Duke of York’s playhouse, and there saw <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Impertinents</i>, a play which pleases me well still; but it is with great trouble that I now see a play, because of my eyes, the light of the candles making it very troublesome to me. After the play; my wife and I towards the Park, but it being too late we to Creed’s, and there find him and her [his wife] together alone, in their new house, where I never was before, they lodging before at the next door, and a pretty house it is; but I do not see that they intend to keep any coach. Here they treat us like strangers, quite according to the fashion⁠—nothing to drink or eat, which is a thing that will spoil our ever having any acquaintance with them; for we do continue the old freedom and kindness of England to all our friends. But they do here talk mightily of my Lady Paulina making a very good end, and being mighty religious in her lifetime; and hath left many good notes of sermons and religion; wrote with her own hand, which nobody ever knew of; which I am glad of: but she was always a peevish lady. Thence home, and there to talk and to supper and to bed, all being very safe as to my seeing of poor <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Deb.</abbr> yesterday.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1669-4-25" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1669-04-25">15th</time>. Up, and to the office, and thence before the office sat to the Excise Office with <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Hewer, but found some occasion to go another way to the Temple upon business, and I by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Deb.</abbr>’s direction did know whither in Jewen Street to direct my hackney coachman, while I stayed in the coach in Aldgate Street, to go thither just to enquire whether <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hunt, her aunt, was in town, who brought me word she was not; I thought this was as much as I could do at once, and therefore went away troubled through that I could do no more but to the office I must go and did, and there all the morning, but coming thither I find Bagwell’s wife, who did give me a little note into my hand, wherein I find her <i xml:lang="fr">para</i> invite me <i xml:lang="fr">para</i> meet her in Moorfields this noon, where I might speak with her, and so after the office was up, my wife being gone before by invitation to my cousin Turner’s to dine, I to the place, and there, after walking up and down by the windmills, I did find her and talk with her, but it being holiday and the place full of people, we parted, leaving further discourse and doing to another time. Thence I away, and through Jewen Street, my mind, God knows, running that way, but stopped not, but going down Holborne hill, by the Conduit, I did see <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Deb.</abbr> on foot going up the hill. I saw her, and she me, but she made no stop, but seemed unwilling to speak to me; so I away on, but then stopped and ’light, and after her and overtook her at the end of Hosier lane in Smithfield, and without standing in the street desired her to follow me, and I led her into a little blind alehouse within the walls, and there she and I alone fell to talk and <i xml:lang="fr">baiser la</i> and <i xml:lang="fr">toker</i> <i xml:lang="es">su</i> <i xml:lang="fr">mammailles</i>, but she mighty coy, and I hope modest.⁠ ⁠… I did give her in a paper 20<abbr>s.</abbr>, and we did agree <i xml:lang="fr">para</i> meet again in the Hall at Westminster on Monday next; and so giving me great hopes by her carriage that she continues modest and honest, we did there part, she going home and I to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Turner’s, but when I come back to the place where I left my coach it was gone, I having stayed too long, which did trouble me to abuse the poor fellow, so that taking another coach I did direct him to find out the fellow and send him to me. At my cousin Turner’s I find they are gone all to dinner to Povy’s, and thither I, and there they were all, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batelier and his sister, and had dined; but I had good things brought me, and then all up and down the house, and mightily pleased to see the fine rooms: but, the truth is, there are so many bad pictures, that to me make the good ones lose much of the pleasure in seeing them. <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">The.</abbr> and Betty Turner in new flowered tabby gowns, and so we were pretty merry, only my fear upon me for what I had newly done, do keep my content in. So, about five or six o’clock, away, and I took my wife and the two Bateliers, and carried them homeward, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batelier ’lighting, I carried the women round by Islington, and so down Bishopsgate Street home, and there to talk and sup, and then to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1669-4-26" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1669-04-26">16th</time>. Up, and to my chamber, where with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gibson all the morning, and there by noon did almost finish what I had to write about the Administration of the Office to present to the Duke of York, and my wife being gone abroad with <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Hewer, to see the new play today, at the Duke of York’s house, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Guzman</i>, I dined alone with my people, and in the afternoon away by coach to Whitehall; and there the Office attended the Duke of York; and being despatched pretty soon, and told that we should not wait on the King, as intended, till Sunday, I thence presently to the Duke of York’s playhouse, and there, in the 18<abbr>d.</abbr> seat, did get room to see almost three acts of the play; but it seemed to me but very ordinary. After the play done, I into the pit, and there find my wife and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Hewer; and Sheres got to them, which, so jealous is my nature, did trouble me, though my judgment tells me there is no hurt in it, on neither side; but here I did meet with Shadwell, the poet, who, to my great wonder, do tell me that my Lord of [Orrery] did write this play, trying what he could do in comedy, since his heroic plays could do no more wonders. This do trouble me; for it is as mean a thing, and so he says, as hath been upon the stage a great while; and Harris, who hath no part in it, did come to me, and told me in discourse that he was glad of it, it being a play that will not take.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4491" id="noteref-4491" epub:type="noteref">4491</a> Thence home, and to my business at the office, to finish it, but was in great pain about yesterday still, lest my wife should have sent her porter to enquire anything, though for my heart I cannot see it possible how anything could be discovered of it, but yet such is fear as to render me full of doubt and disgust. At night to supper and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1669-4-27" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1669-04-27">17th</time>. Up, and to the office, where all the morning. At noon at home to dinner, and there find <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierce, the surgeon, and he dined with us; and there hearing that <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Alchymist</i> was acted, we did go, and took him with us to the King’s house; and it is still a good play, having not been acted for two or three years before; but I do miss Clun,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4492" id="noteref-4492" epub:type="noteref">4492</a> for the Doctor.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4493" id="noteref-4493" epub:type="noteref">4493</a> But more my eyes will not let me enjoy the pleasure I used to have in a play. Thence with my wife in hackney to Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Coventry’s, who being gone to the Park we drove after him, and there met him coming out, and followed him home, and there sent my wife to Unthanke’s while I spent an hour with him reading over first my draught of the Administration of the Navy, which he do like very well; and so fell to talk of other things, and among the rest of the story of his late disgrace, and how basely and in what a mean manner the Duke of Buckingham hath proceeded against him⁠—not like a man of honour. He tells me that the King will not give other answer about his coming to kiss his hands, than “Not yet.” But he says that this that he desires, of kissing the King’s hand, is only to show to the world that he is not discontented, and not in any desire to come again into play, though I do perceive that he speaks this with less earnestness than heretofore: and this, it may be, is, from what he told me lately, that the King is offended at what is talked, that he hath declared himself desirous not to have to do with any employment more. But he do tell me that the leisure he hath yet had do not at all begin to be burdensome to him, he knowing how to spend his time with content to himself; and that he hopes shortly to contract his expense, so as that he shall not be under any straits in that respect neither; and so seems to be in very good condition of content. Thence I away over the Park, it being now night, to Whitehall, and there, in the Duchess’s chamber, do find the Duke of York; and, upon my offer to speak with him, he did come to me, and withdrew to his closet, and there did hear and approve my paper of the Administration of the Navy, only did bid me alter these words, “upon the rupture between the late King and the Parliament,” to these, “the beginning of the late Rebellion;” giving it me as but reason to show that it was with the Rebellion that the Navy was put by out of its old good course, into that of a Commission. Having done this, we fell to other talk; he with great confidence telling me how matters go among our adversaries, in reference to the Navy, and that he thinks they do begin to flag; but then, beginning to talk in general of the excellency of old constitutions, he did bring out of his cabinet, and made me read it, an extract out of a book of my late Lord of Northumberland’s, so prophetic of the business of Chatham, as is almost miraculous.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4494" id="noteref-4494" epub:type="noteref">4494</a> I did desire, and he did give it me to copy out, which pleased me mightily, and so, it being late, I away and to my wife, and by hackney; home, and there, my eyes being weary with reading so much: but yet not so much as I was afeard they would, we home to supper and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1669-4-28" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1669-04-28">18th (Lord’s day)</time>. Up, and all the morning till 2 o’clock at my Office, with Gibson and Tom, about drawing up fair my discourse of the Administration of the Navy, and then, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Spong being come to dine with me, I in to dinner, and then out to my Office again, to examine the fair draught; and so borrowing Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes’s coach, he going with Colonel Middleton, I to Whitehall, where we all met and did sign it and then to my Lord Arlington’s, where the King, and the Duke of York, and Prince Rupert, as also Ormond and the two Secretaries, with my Lord Ashly and Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T.</abbr> Clifton was. And there, by and by, being called in, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Williamson did read over our paper, which was in a letter to the Duke of York, bound up in a book with the Duke of York’s Book of Instructions. He read it well; and, after read, we were bid to withdraw, nothing being at all said to it. And by and by we were called in again, and nothing said to that business; but another begun, about the state of this year’s action, and our wants of money, as I had stated the same lately to our Treasurers; which I was bid, and did largely, and with great content, open. And having so done, we all withdrew, and left them to debate our supply of money; to which, being called in, and referred to attend on the Lords of the Treasury, we all departed. And I only stayed in the House till the Council rose; and then to the Duke of York, who in the Duchess’s chamber come to me, and told me that the book was there left with my Lord Arlington, for any of the Lords to view that had a mind, and to prepare and present to the King what they had to say in writing, to any part of it, which is all we can desire, and so that rested. The Duke of York then went to other talk; and by and by comes the Prince of Tuscany to visit him, and the Duchess; and I find that he do still remain incognito, and so intends to do all the time he stays here, for avoiding trouble to the King and himself, and expense also to both. Thence I to Whitehall Gate, thinking to have found Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes’s coach staying for me; but, not being there, and this being the first day of rain we have had many a day, the streets being as dusty as in summer, I forced to walk to my cousin Turner’s, and there find my wife newly gone home, which vexed me, and so I, having kissed and taken leave of Betty, who goes to Putney to school tomorrow, I walked through the rain to the Temple, and there, with much ado, got a coach, and so home, and there to supper, and Pelling comes to us, and after much talk, we parted, and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1669-4-29" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1669-04-29">19th</time>. Up, and with Tom (whom, with his wife, I, and my wife, had this morning taken occasion to tell that I did intend to give him £40 for himself, and £20 to his wife, towards their setting out in the world, and that my wife would give her £20 more, that she might have as much to begin with as he) by coach to Whitehall, and there having set him work in the Robe Chamber, to write something for me, I to Westminster Hall, and there walked from 10 o’clock to past 12, expecting to have met <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Deb.</abbr>, but whether she had been there before, and missing me went away, or is prevented in coming, and hath no mind to come to me (the last whereof, as being most pleasing, as showing most modesty, I should be most glad of), I know not, but she not then appearing, I being tired with walking went home, and my wife being all day at Jane’s, helping her, as she said, to cut out linen and other things belonging to her new condition, I after dinner out again, and, calling for my coach, which was at the coachmaker’s, and hath been for these two or three days, to be new painted, and the window-frames gilt against Maiday, went on with my hackney to Whitehall, and thence by water to Westminster Hall, and there did beckon to Doll Lane, now <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Powell, as she would have herself called, and went to her sister Martin’s lodgings, the first time I have been there these eight or ten months, I think, and her sister being gone to Portsmouth to her husband, I did stay and talk and drink with Doll.⁠ ⁠… So away and to Whitehall, and there took my own coach, which was now come, and so away home, and there to do business, and my wife being come home we to talk and to sup, there having been nothing yet like discovery in my wife of what hath lately passed with me about <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Deb.</abbr>, and so with great content to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1669-4-30" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1669-04-30">20th</time>. Up; and to the Office, and my wife abroad with Mary Batelier, with our own coach, but borrowed Sir J Minnes’s coachman, that so our own might stay at home, to attend at dinner; our family being mightily disordered by our little boy’s falling sick the last night; and we fear it will prove the smallpox. At noon comes my guest, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hugh May,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4495" id="noteref-4495" epub:type="noteref">4495</a> and with him Sir Henry Capell, my old Lord Capel’s son, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Parker; and I had a pretty dinner for them; and both before and after dinner had excellent discourse; and showed them my closet and my Office, and the method of it to their great content; and more extraordinary, manly discourse and opportunity of showing myself, and learning from others, I have not, in ordinary discourse, had in my life, they being all persons of worth, but especially Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Capell, whose being a Parliament-man, and hearing my discourse in the Parliament-house, hath, as May tells me, given him a long desire to know and discourse with me. In the afternoon we walked to the Old Artillery-Ground<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4496" id="noteref-4496" epub:type="noteref">4496</a> near the Spitalfields, where I never was before, but now, by Captain Deane’s invitation, did go to see his new gun tryed, this being the place where the Officers of the Ordnance do try all their great guns; and when we come, did find that the trial had been made; and they going away with extraordinary report of the proof of his gun, which, from the shortness and bigness, they do call Punchinello. But I desired Colonel Legge to stay and give us a sight of her performance, which he did, and there, in short, against a gun more than as long and as heavy again, and charged with as much powder again, she carried the same bullet as strong to the mark, and nearer and above the mark at a point blank than theirs, and is more easily managed, and recoyles no more than that, which is a thing so extraordinary as to be admired for the happiness of his invention, and to the great regret of the old Gunners and Officers of the Ordnance that were there, only Colonel Legge did do her much right in his report of her. And so, having seen this great and first experiment, we all parted, I seeing my guests into a hackney coach, and myself, with Captain Deane, taking a hackney coach, did go out towards Bow, and went as far as Stratford, and all the way talking of this invention, and he offering me a third of the profit of the invention; which, for aught I know, or do at present think, may prove matter considerable to us: for either the King will give him a reward for it, if he keeps it to himself, or he will give us a patent to make our profit of it: and no doubt but it will be of profit to merchantmen and others, to have guns of the same force at half the charge. This was our talk: and then to talk of other things, of the Navy in general: and, among other things, he did tell me that he do hear how the Duke of Buckingham hath a spite at me, which I knew before, but value it not: and he tells me that Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T.</abbr> Allen is not my friend; but for all this I am not much troubled, for I know myself so usefull that, as I believe, they will not part with me; so I thank God my condition is such that I can retire, and be able to live with comfort, though not with abundance. Thus we spent the evening with extraordinary good discourse, to my great content, and so home to the Office, and there did some business, and then home, where my wife do come home, and I vexed at her staying out so late, but she tells me that she hath been at home with <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Batelier a good while, so I made nothing of it, but to supper and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1669-5-1" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1669-05-01">21st</time>. Up; and with my own coach as far as the Temple, and thence sent it to my cousin Turner, who, to ease her own horses, that are going with her out of town, do borrow mine today. So I to Auditor Wood’s, and thereto meet, and met my Lord Bellassis upon some business of his accounts, and having done that did thence go to <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s, and attended the Duke of York a little, being the first time of my waiting on him at <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s this summer, whither he is now newly gone and thence walked to Whitehall; and so, by and by, to the Council-Chamber, and heard a remarkable cause pleaded between the Farmers of the Excise of Wiltshire, in complaint against the justices of Peace of Salisbury: and Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Finch was for the former. But, Lord! to see how he did with his admirable eloquence order the matter, is not to be conceived almost: so pleasant a thing it is to hear him plead. Then at noon by coach home, and thither by and by comes cousin Turner, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">The.</abbr>, and Joyce, in their riding-clod: they being come from their lodgings to her husband’s chamber, at the Temple, and there do lie, and purpose to go out of town on Friday next; and here I had a good dinner for them. After dinner by water to Whitehall, where the Duke of York did meet our Office, and went with us to the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury; and there we did go over all the business of the state I had drawn up, of this year’s action and expense, which I did do to their satisfaction, and convincing them of the necessity of providing more money, if possible, for us. Thence the Duke of York being gone, I did there stay walking with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Cholmly in the Court, talking of news; where he told me, that now the great design of the Duke of Buckingham is to prevent the meeting, since he cannot bring about with the King the dissolving, of this Parliament, that the King may not need it; and therefore my Lord <abbr>St.</abbr> Albans is hourly expected with great offers of a million of money<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4497" id="noteref-4497" epub:type="noteref">4497</a> to buy our breach with the Dutch: and this, they do think, may tempt the King to take the money, and thereby be out of a necessity of calling the Parliament again, which these people dare not suffer to meet again: but this he doubts, and so do I, that it will be to the ruin of the nation if we fall out with Holland. This we were discoursing when my boy comes to tell me that his mistress was at the Gate with the coach, whither I went, and there find my wife and the whole company. So she, and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Turner, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">The.</abbr>, and Talbot, in mine: and Joyce, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batelier, and I, in a hackney, to Hyde Park, where I was ashamed to be seen; but mightily pleased, though troubled, with a drunken coachman that did not remember when we come to ’light, where it was that he took us up; but said at Hammersmith, and thither he was carrying of us when we come first out of the Park. So I carried them all to Hercules-Pillars, and there did treat them: and so, about ten at night, parted, and my wife, and I, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batelier, home; and he gone, we to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1669-5-2" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1669-05-02">22nd</time>. Up, and to the Office, where all the morning. At noon home to dinner, and Captain Deane with us; and very good discourse, and particularly about my getting a book for him to draw up his whole theory of shipping, which, at my desire, he hath gone far in, and hath shown me what he hath done therein, to admiration. I did give him a Parallelogram, which he is mightily taken with; and so after dinner to the Office, where all the afternoon till night late, and then home. Vexed at my wife’s not being come home, she being gone again abroad with <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Batelier, and come not home till ten at night, which vexed me, so that I to bed, and lay in pain awake till past one, and then to sleep.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1669-5-3" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1669-05-03">23rd</time>. Going to rise, without saying anything, my wife stopped me; and, after a little angry talk, did tell me how she spent all day yesterday with <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">M.</abbr> Batelier and her sweetheart, and seeing a play at the New Nursery, which is set up at the house in Lincoln’s Inn Fields, which was formerly the King’s house. So that I was mightily pleased again, and rose a with great content; and so by water to Whitehall, and there to the Council-Chamber, and heard two or three causes: among others, that of the complaint of Sir Philip Howard and Watson, the inventors, as they pretend, of the business of varnishing and lackerworke, against the Company of Painters, who take upon them to do the same thing; where I saw a great instance of the weakness of a young Counsel not used to such an audience, against the Solicitor-General and two more able Counsel used to it. Though he had the right of his side, and did prevail for what he pretended to against the rest, yet it was with much disadvantage and hazard. Here, also I heard <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Papillion<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4498" id="noteref-4498" epub:type="noteref">4498</a> make his defence to the King, against some complaints of the Farmers of Excise; but it was so weak, and done only by his own seeking, that it was to his injury more than profit, and made his case the worse, being ill managed, and in a cause against the King. Thence at noon, the Council rising, I to Unthanke’s, and there by agreement met my wife, and with her to the Cocke, and did give her a dinner, but yet both of us but in an ill humour, whatever was the matter with her, but thence to the King’s playhouse, and saw <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Generous Portugals</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4499" id="noteref-4499" epub:type="noteref">4499</a> a play that pleases me better and better every time we see it; and, I thank God! it did not trouble my eyes so much as I was afeard it would. Here, by accident, we met <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheres, and yet I could not but be troubled, because my wife do so delight to talk of him, and to see him. Nevertheless, we took him with us to our mercer’s, and to the Exchange, and he helped me to choose a summer-suit of coloured camelott, coat and breeches, and a flowered tabby vest very rich; and so home, where he took his leave, and down to Greenwich, where he hath some friends; and I to see Colonel Middleton, who hath been ill for a day or two, or three; and so home to supper, and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1669-5-4" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1669-05-04">24th</time>. Up, and to the office, where all the morning, and at noon home to dinner, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheres dining with us by agreement; and my wife, which troubled me, mighty careful to have a handsome dinner for him; but yet I see no reason to be troubled at it, he being a very civil and worthy man, I think; but only it do seem to imply some little neglect of me. After dinner to the King’s house, and there saw <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The General</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4500" id="noteref-4500" epub:type="noteref">4500</a> revived⁠—a good play, that pleases me well, and thence, our coach coming for us, we parted and home, and I busy late at the office, and then home to supper and to bed. Well pleased tonight to have Lead, the vizard-maker, bring me home my vizard, with a tube fastened in it, which, I think, will do my business, at least in a great measure, for the easing of my eyes.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1669-5-5" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1669-05-05">25th (Lord’s day)</time>. Up, and to my Office awhile, and thither comes Lead with my vizard, with a tube fastened within both eyes; which, with the help which he prompts me to, of a glass in the tube, do content me mightily. So to church, where a stranger made a dull sermon, but I mightily pleased to looks upon <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Buckworth’s little pretty daughters, and so home to, dinner, where <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Howe come and dined with us; and then I to my Office, he being gone, to write down my journal for the last twelve days: and did it with the help of my vizard and tube fixed to it, and do find it mighty manageable, but how helpfull to my eyes this trial will show me. So abroad with my wife, in the afternoon, to the Park, where very much company, and the weather very pleasant. I carried my wife to the Lodge, the first time this year, and there in our coach eat a cheesecake and drank a tankard of milk. I showed her this day also first the Prince of Tuscany, who was in the Park, and many very fine ladies, and so home, and after supper to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1669-5-6" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1669-05-06">26th</time>. Up, having lain long, and then by coach with <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Hewer to the Excise Office, and so to Lilly’s, the Varnisher, who is lately dead, and his wife and brother keep up the trade, and there I left my French prints to be put on boards: and, while I was there, a fire burst out in a chimney of a house over against his house, but it was with a gun quickly put out. So to Whitehall, and did a little business there at the Treasury chamber, and so homeward, calling at the laceman’s for some lace for my new suit, and at my tailor’s, and so home, where to dinner, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheres dined with us, who come hither today to teach my wife the rules of perspective; but I think, upon trial, he thinks it too hard to teach her, being ignorant of the principles of lines. After dinner comes one Colonel Macnachan, one that I see often at Court, a Scotchman, but know him not; only he brings me a letter from my Lord Middleton, who, he says, is in great distress for £500 to relieve my Lord Morton<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4501" id="noteref-4501" epub:type="noteref">4501</a> with, but upon what account I know not; and he would have me advance it without order upon his pay for Tangier, which I was astonished at, but had the grace to deny him with an excuse. And so he went away, leaving me a little troubled that I was thus driven, on a sudden, to do anything herein; but Creed, coming just now to see me, he approves of what I have done. And then to talk of general matters, and, by and by, Sheres being gone, my wife, and he, and I out, and I set him down at Temple Bar, and myself and wife went down the Temple upon seeming business, only to put him off, and just at the Temple gate I spied <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Deb.</abbr> with another gentlewoman, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Deb.</abbr> winked on me and smiled, but undiscovered, and I was glad to see her. So my wife and I to the ’Change, about things for her; and here, at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Burnett’s shop, I am told by Betty, who was all undressed, of a great fire happened in Durham-Yard last night, burning the house of one Lady Hungerford,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4502" id="noteref-4502" epub:type="noteref">4502</a> who was to come to town to it this night; and so the house is burned, new furnished, by carelessness of the girl sent to take off a candle from a bunch of candles, which she did by burning it off, and left the rest, as is supposed, on fire. The King and Court were here, it seems, and stopped the fire by blowing up of the next house. The King and Court went out of town to Newmarket this morning betimes, for a week. So home, and there to my chamber, and got my wife to read to me a little, and so to supper and to bed. Coming home this night I did call at the coachmaker’s, and do resolve upon having the standards of my coach gilt with this new sort of varnish, which will come but to 40<abbr>s.</abbr>; and, contrary to my expectation, the doing of the biggest coach all over comes not to above £6, which is [not] very much.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1669-5-7" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1669-05-07">27th</time>. Up, and to the Office, where all the morning. At noon home to dinner, and then to the Office again, where the afternoon busy till late, and then home, and got my wife to read to me in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Nepotisme</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4503" id="noteref-4503" epub:type="noteref">4503</a> which is very pleasant, and so to supper and to bed. This afternoon was brought to me a fresh Distringas upon the score of the Tangier accounts which vexes me, though I hope it will not turn to my wrong.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1669-5-8" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1669-05-08">28th</time>. Up, and was called upon by Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Cholmly to discourse about some accounts of his, of Tangier: and then other talk; and I find by him that it is brought almost effect ([through] the late endeavours of the Duke of York and Duchess, the Queen-Mother, and my Lord <abbr>St.</abbr> Albans, together with some of the contrary faction, my Lord Arlington), that for a sum of money we shall enter into a league with the King of France, wherein, he says, my Lord Chancellor<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4504" id="noteref-4504" epub:type="noteref">4504</a> is also concerned; and that he believes that, in the doing hereof, it is meant that he [Clarendon] shall come again, and that this sum of money will so help the King that he will not need the Parliament; and that, in that regard it will be forwarded by the Duke of Buckingham and his faction, who dread the Parliament. But hereby we must leave the Dutch, and that I doubt will undo us; and Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Cholmly says he finds <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Coventry do think the like. Lady Castlemayne is instrumental in this matter, and, he say never more great with the King than she is now. But this a thing that will make the Parliament and kingdom mad, and will turn to our ruin: for with this money the King shall wanton away his time in pleasures, and think nothing of the main till it be too late. He gone, I to the office, where busy till noon, and then home to dinner, where <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batelier dined with us, and pretty merry, and so I to the office again. This morning <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheres sent me, in two volumes, Mariana his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Spaine</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4505" id="noteref-4505" epub:type="noteref">4505</a> in Spanish, an excellent book; and I am much obliged for it to him.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1669-5-9" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1669-05-09">29th</time>. Up, and to the Office, where all the morning, and at noon dined at home, and then to the Office again, there to despatch as much business as I could, that I might be at liberty tomorrow to look after my many things that I have to do, against Maiday. So at night home to supper and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1669-5-10" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1669-05-10">30th</time>. Up, and by coach to the coachmaker’s: and there I do find a great many ladies sitting in the body of a coach that must be ended by tomorrow: they were my Lady Marquess of Winchester,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4506" id="noteref-4506" epub:type="noteref">4506</a> Bellassis,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4507" id="noteref-4507" epub:type="noteref">4507</a> and other great ladies; eating of bread and butter, and drinking ale. I to my coach, which is silvered over, but no varnish yet laid on, so I put it in a way of doing; and myself about other business, and particularly to see Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Coventry, with whom I talked a good while to my great content; and so to other places⁠—among others, to my tailor’s: and then to the belt-maker’s, where my belt cost me 55<abbr>s.</abbr>, of the colour of my new suit; and here, understanding that the mistress of the house, an oldish woman in a hat hath some water good for the eyes, she did dress me, making my eyes smart most horribly, and did give me a little glass of it, which I will use, and hope it will do me good. So to the cutler’s, and there did give Tom, who was with me all day a sword cost me 12<abbr>s.</abbr> and a belt of my own; and set my own silver-hilt sword a-gilding against tomorrow. This morning I did visit <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Oldenburgh,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4508" id="noteref-4508" epub:type="noteref">4508</a> and did see the instrument for perspective made by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Wren,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4509" id="noteref-4509" epub:type="noteref">4509</a> of which I have one making by Browne; and the sight of this do please me mightily. At noon my wife come to me at my tailor’s, and I sent her home and myself and Tom dined at Hercules’ Pillars; and so about our business again, and particularly to Lilly’s, the varnisher about my prints, whereof some of them are pasted upon the boards, and to my full content. Thence to the frame-maker’s one Morris, in Long Acre, who showed me several forms of frames to choose by, which was pretty, in little bits of mouldings, to choose by. This done, I to my coach-maker’s, and there vexed to see nothing yet done to my coach, at three in the afternoon; but I set it in doing, and stood by it till eight at night, and saw the painter varnish which is pretty to see how every doing it over do make it more and more yellow; and it dries as fast in the sun as it can be laid on almost; and most coaches are, nowadays done so, and it is very pretty when laid on well, and not pale, as some are, even to show the silver. Here I did make the workmen drink, and saw my coach cleaned and oiled; and, staying among poor people there in the alley, did hear them call their fat child Punch, which pleased me mightily that word being become a word of common use for all that is thick and short. At night home, and there find my wife hath been making herself clean against tomorrow; and, late as it was, I did send my coachman and horses to fetch home the coach tonight, and so we to supper, myself most weary with walking and standing so much, to see all things fine against tomorrow, and so to bed. God give a blessing to it! Meeting with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheres, he went with me up and down to several places, and, among others, to buy a periwig, but I bought none; and also to Dancre’s, where he was about my picture of Windsor, which is mighty pretty, and so will the prospect of Rome be.</p>
			</article>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
