<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>August 1660</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-8" epub:type="chapter z3998:diary">
			<h2 epub:type="title">August 1660</h2>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-8-1">August 1st</time>. Up very early, and by water to Whitehall to my Lord’s, and there up to my Lord’s lodging (<abbr class="name">Wm.</abbr> Howe being now ill of the gout at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierce’s), and there talked with him about the affairs of the Navy, and how I was now to wait today at the Privy Seal. Commissioner Pett went with me, whom I desired to make my excuse at the office for my absence this day. Hence to the Privy Seal Office, where I got (by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mathews’ means) possession of the books and table, but with some expectation of Baron’s bringing of a warrant from the King to have this month. Nothing done this morning, Baron having spoke to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Woodson and Groome (clerks to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Trumbull of the Signet) to keep all work in their hands till the afternoon, at which time he expected to have his warrant from the King for this month.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-628" id="noteref-628" epub:type="noteref">628</a> I took at noon <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harper to the Leg in King Street, and did give him his dinner, who did still advise me much to act wholly myself at the Privy Seal, but I told him that I could not, because I had other business to take up my time. In the afternoon at, the office again, where we had many things to sign; and I went to the Council Chamber, and there got my Lord to sign the first bill, and the rest all myself; but received no money today. After I had signed all, I went with Dick Scobell and Luellin to drink at a bottle beer house in the Strand, and after staying there a while (had sent <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Hewer home before), I took boat and homewards went, and in Fish Street bought a Lobster, and as I had bought it I met with Winter and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Delabarr, and there with a piece of sturgeon of theirs we went to the Sun Tavern in the street<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-629" id="noteref-629" epub:type="noteref">629</a> and ate them. Late home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-8-2">2nd</time>. To Westminster by water with Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten and Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen (our servants in another boat) to the Admiralty; and from thence I went to my Lord’s to fetch him thither, where we stayed in the morning about ordering of money for the victuailers, and advising how to get a sum of money to carry on the business of the Navy. From thence dined with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blackburne at his house with his friends (his wife being in the country and just upon her return to London), where we were very well treated and merry. From thence <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Hewer and I to the office of Privy Seal, where I stayed all the afternoon, and received about £40 for yesterday and today, at which my heart rejoiced for God’s blessing to me, to give me this advantage by chance, there being of this £40 about £10 due to me for this day’s work. So great is the present profit of this office, above what it was in the King’s time; there being the last month about 300 bills; whereas in the late King’s time it was much to have 40. With my money home by coach, it, being the first time that I could get home before our gates were shut since I came to the Navy office. When I came home I found my wife not very well of her old pain … which she had when we were married first. I went and cast up the expense that I laid out upon my former house (because there are so many that are desirous of it, and I am, in my mind, loth to let it go out of my hands, for fear of a turn). I find my layings-out to come to about £20, which with my fine will come to about £22 to him that shall hire my house of me.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-630" id="noteref-630" epub:type="noteref">630</a> To bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-8-3">3rd</time>. Up betimes this morning, and after the barber had done with me, then to the office, where I and Sir William Pen only did meet and despatch business. At noon my wife and I by coach to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Clerke’s to dinner: I was very much taken with his lady, a comely, proper woman, though not handsome; but a woman of the best language I ever heard. Here dined <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Pierce and her husband. After dinner I took leave to go to Westminster, where I was at the Privy Seal Office all day, signing things and taking money, so that I could not do as I had intended, that is to return to them and go to the Red Bull Playhouse,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-631" id="noteref-631" epub:type="noteref">631</a> but I took coach and went to see whether it was done so or no, and I found it done. So I returned to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Clerke’s, where I found them and my wife, and by and by took leave and went away home.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-8-4">4th</time>. To White Hall, where I found my Lord gone with the King by water to dine at the Tower with Sir <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Robinson,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-632" id="noteref-632" epub:type="noteref">632</a> Lieutenant. I found my Lady Jemimah<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-633" id="noteref-633" epub:type="noteref">633</a> at my Lord’s, with whom I staid and dined, all alone; after dinner to the Privy Seal Office, where I did business. So to a Committee of Parliament (Sir Hen[eage] Finch,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-634" id="noteref-634" epub:type="noteref">634</a> Chairman), to give them an answer to an order of theirs, “that we could not give them any account of the Accounts of the Navy in the years 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, as they desire.” After that I went and bespoke some linen of Betty Lane in the Hall, and after that to the Trumpet, where I sat and talked with her, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> At night, it being very rainy, and it thundering and lightning exceedingly, I took coach at the Trumpet door, taking Monsieur L’Impertinent along with me as far as the Savoy, where he said he went to lie with Cary Dillon,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-635" id="noteref-635" epub:type="noteref">635</a> and is still upon the mind of going (he and his whole family) to Ireland. Having set him down I made haste home, and in the courtyard, it being very dark, I heard a man inquire for my house, and having asked his business, he told me that my man William (who went this morning⁠—out of town to meet his aunt Blackburne) was come home not very well to his mother, and so could not come home tonight. At which I was very sorry. I found my wife still in pain. To bed, having not time to write letters, and indeed having so many to write to all places that I have no heart to go about them. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Shaw did die yesterday and her husband so sick that he is not like to live.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-8-5">5th</time>. Lord’s day. My wife being much in pain, I went this morning to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Williams (who had cured her once before of this business), in Holborn, and he did give me an ointment which I sent home by my boy, and a plaister which I took with me to Westminster (having called and seen my mother in the morning as I went to the doctor), where I dined with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply (my Lord dining at Kensington). After dinner to <abbr>St.</abbr> Margaret’s, where the first time I ever heard Common Prayer in that Church. I sat with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hill in his pew; <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hill that married in Axe Yard and that was aboard us in the Hope. Church done I went and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply to see <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Howe at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierces, where I staid singing of songs and psalms an hour or two, and were very pleasant with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Pierce and him. Thence to my Lord’s, where I staid and talked and drank with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply. After that to Westminster stairs, where I saw a fray between Mynheer Clinke, a Dutchman, that was at Hartlibb’s wedding, and a waterman, which made good sport. After that I got a Gravesend boat, that was come up to fetch some bread on this side the bridge, and got them to carry me to the bridge, and so home, where I found my wife. After prayers I to bed to her, she having had a very bad night of it. This morning before I was up Will came home pretty well again, he having been only weary with riding, which he is not used to.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-8-6">6th</time>. This morning at the office, and, that being done, home to dinner all alone, my wife being ill in pain abed, which I was troubled at, and not a little impatient. After dinner to Whitehall at the Privy Seal all the afternoon, and at night with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Man to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rawlinson’s in Fenchurch Street, where we staid till eleven o’clock at night. So home and to bed, my wife being all this day in great pain. This night <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Man offered me £1,000 for my office of Clerk of the Acts, which made my mouth water; but yet I dare not take it till I speak with my Lord to have his consent.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-8-7">7th</time>. This morning to Whitehall to the Privy Seal, and took <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore and myself and dined at my Lord’s with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply. While I was at dinner in come <abbr class="name">Sam.</abbr> Hartlibb<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-636" id="noteref-636" epub:type="noteref">636</a> and his brother-in-law,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-637" id="noteref-637" epub:type="noteref">637</a> now knighted by the King, to request my promise of a ship for them to Holland, which I had promised to get for them. After dinner to the Privy Seal all the afternoon. At night, meeting <abbr class="name">Sam.</abbr> Hartlibb, he took me by coach to Kensington, to my Lord of Holland’s;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-638" id="noteref-638" epub:type="noteref">638</a> I staid in the coach while he went in about his business. He staying long I left the coach and walked back again before on foot (a very pleasant walk) to Kensington, where I drank and staid very long waiting for him. At last he came, and after drinking at the inn we went towards Westminster. Here I endeavoured to have looked out Jane that formerly lived at <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Williams’ at Cambridge, whom I had long thought to live at present here, but I found myself in an error, meeting one in the place where I expected to have found her, but she proved not she though very like her. We went to the Bullhead, where he and I sat and drank till 11 at night, and so home on foot. Found my wife pretty well again, and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-8-8">8th</time>. We met at the office, and after that to dinner at home, and from thence with my wife by water to Catan Sterpin, with whom and her mistress Pye we sat discoursing of Kate’s marriage to <abbr>Mons.</abbr> Petit,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-639" id="noteref-639" epub:type="noteref">639</a> her mistress and I giving the best advice we could for her to suspend her marriage till <abbr>Mons.</abbr> Petit had got some place that may be able to maintain her, and not for him to live upon the portion that she shall bring him. From thence to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Butler’s to see his daughters, the first time that ever we made a visit to them. We found them very pretty, and <abbr class="name">Coll.</abbr> Dillon there, a very merry and witty companion, but methinks they live in a gaudy but very poor condition. From thence, my wife and I intending to see <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blackburne, who had been a day or two again to see my wife, but my wife was not in condition to be seen, but she not being at home my wife went to her mother’s and I to the Privy Seal. At night from the Privy Seal, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Woodson and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Jennings and I to the Sun Tavern till it was late, and from thence to my Lord’s, where my wife was come from <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blackburne’s to me, and after I had done some business with my Lord, she and I went to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hunt’s, who would needs have us to lie at her house tonight, she being with my wife so late at my Lord’s with us, and would not let us go home tonight. We lay there all night very pleasantly and at ease …</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-8-9">9th</time>. Left my wife at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hunt’s and I to my Lord’s, and from thence with judge Advocate Fowler, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply to the Rhenish Wine-house, and Captain Hayward of the Plymouth, who is now ordered to carry my Lord Winchelsea, Embassador to Constantinople.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-640" id="noteref-640" epub:type="noteref">640</a> We were very merry, and judge Advocate did give Captain Hayward his Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy. Thence to my office of Privy Seal, and, having signed some things there, with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore and Dean Fuller to the Leg in King Street, and, sending for my wife, we dined there very merry, and after dinner, parted. After dinner with my wife to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blackburne to visit her. She being within I left my wife there, and I to the Privy Seal, where I despatch some business, and from thence to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blackburne again, who did treat my wife and me with a great deal of civility, and did give us a fine collation of collar of beef, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> Thence I, having my head full of drink from having drunk so much Rhenish wine in the morning, and more in the afternoon at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Blackburne’s, came home and so to bed, not well, and very ill all night.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-8-10">10th</time>. I had a great deal of pain all night, and a great loosing upon me so that I could not sleep. In the morning I rose with much pain and to the office. I went and dined at home, and after dinner with great pain in my back I went by water to Whitehall to the Privy Seal, and that done with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore and Creed to Hide Park by coach, and saw a fine footrace three times round the Park<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-641" id="noteref-641" epub:type="noteref">641</a> between an Irishman and Crow, that was once my Lord Claypoole’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-642" id="noteref-642" epub:type="noteref">642</a> footman. (By the way I cannot forget that my Lord Claypoole did the other day make enquiry of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hunt, concerning my House in Axe-yard, and did set her on work to get it of me for him, which methinks is a very great change.) Crow beat the other by above two miles. Returned from Hide Park, I went to my Lord’s, and took Will (who waited for me there) by coach and went home, taking my lute home with me. It had been all this while since I came from sea at my Lord’s for him to play on. To bed in some pain still. For this month or two it is not imaginable how busy my head has been, so that I have neglected to write letters to my uncle Robert in answer to many of his, and to other friends, nor indeed have I done anything as to my own family, and especially this month my waiting at the Privy Seal makes me much more unable to think of anything, because of my constant attendance there after I have done at the Navy Office. But blessed be God for my good chance of the Privy Seal, where I get every day I believe about £3. This place I got by chance, and my Lord did give it me by chance, neither he nor I thinking it to be of the worth that he and I find it to be. Never since I was a man in the world was I ever so great a stranger to public affairs as now I am, having not read a new book or anything like it, or enquiring after any news, or what the Parliament do, or in any wise how things go. Many people look after my house in Axe-yard to hire it, so that I am troubled with them, and I have a mind to get the money to buy goods for my house at the Navy Office, and yet I am loth to put it off because that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Man bids me £1,000 for my office, which is so great a sum that I am loth to settle myself at my new house, lest I should take <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Man’s offer in case I found my Lord willing to it.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-8-11">11th</time>. I rose today without any pain, which makes me think that my pain yesterday was nothing but from my drinking too much the day before. To my Lord this morning, who did give me order to get some things ready against the afternoon for the Admiralty where he would meet. To the Privy Seal, and from thence going to my own house in Axeyard, I went in to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Crisp’s, where I met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hartlibb; for whom I wrote a letter for my Lord to sign for a ship for his brother and sister, who went away hence this day to Gravesend, and from thence to Holland. I found by discourse with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Crisp that he is very jealous of her, for that she is yet very kind to her old servant Meade. Hence to my Lord’s to dinner with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply, so to the Privy Seal; and at night home, and then sent for the barber, and was trimmed in the kitchen, the first time that ever I was so. I was vexed this night that <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Hewer was out of doors till ten at night but was pretty well satisfied again when my wife told me that he wept because I was angry, though indeed he did give me a good reason for his being out; but I thought it a good occasion to let him know that I do expect his being at home. So to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-8-12">12th</time>. Lord’s day. To my Lord, and with him to White Hall Chappell, where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Calamy preached, and made a good sermon upon these words “To whom much is given, of him much is required.” He was very officious with his three reverences to the King, as others do. After sermon a brave anthem of Captain Cooke’s,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-643" id="noteref-643" epub:type="noteref">643</a> which he himself sung, and the King was well pleased with it. My Lord dined at my Lord Chamberlain’s,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-644" id="noteref-644" epub:type="noteref">644</a> and I at his house with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply. After dinner I did give <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Donne; who is going to sea, the key of my cabin and direction for the putting up of my things. After, that I went to walk, and meeting <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lane of Westminster Hall, I took her to my Lord’s, and did give her a bottle of wine in the garden, where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fairbrother, of Cambridge, did come and found us, and drank with us. After that I took her to my house, where I was exceeding free in dallying with her, and she not unfree to take it. At night home and called at my father’s, where I found <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fairbrother, but I did not stay but went homewards and called in at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rawlinson’s, whither my uncle Wight was coming and did come, but was exceeding angry (he being a little fuddled, and I think it was that I should see him in that case) as I never saw him in my life, which I was somewhat troubled at. Home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-8-13">13th</time>. A sitting day at our office. After dinner to Whitehall; to the Privy Seal, whither my father came to me, and staid talking with me a great while, telling me that he had propounded <abbr>Mr.</abbr> John Pickering for Sir Thomas Honywood’s daughter,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-645" id="noteref-645" epub:type="noteref">645</a> which I think he do not deserve for his own merit: I know not what he may do for his estate. My father and Creed and I to the old Rhenish Winehouse, and talked and drank till night. Then my father home, and I to my Lord’s; where he told me that he would suddenly go into the country, and so did commend the business of his sea commission to me in his absence. After that home by coach, and took my £100 that I had formerly left at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rawlinson’s, home with me, which is the first that ever I was master of at once. To prayers, and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-8-14">14th</time>. To the Privy Seal, and thence to my Lord’s, where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pim, the tailor, and I agreed upon making me a velvet coat. From thence to the Privy Seal again, where Sir Samuel Morland came in with a Baronet’s grant to pass, which the King had given him to make money of. Here he staid with me a great while; and told me the whole manner of his serving the King in the time of the Protector; and how Thurloe’s bad usage made him to do it; how he discovered Sir <abbr class="name">R.</abbr> Willis, and how he hath sunk his fortune for the King; and that now the King hath given him a pension of £500 per annum out of the Post Office for life, and the benefit of two Baronets; all which do make me begin to think that he is not so much a fool as I took him to be. Home by water to the Tower, where my father, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fairbrother, and Cooke dined with me. After dinner in comes young Captain Cuttance<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-646" id="noteref-646" epub:type="noteref">646</a> of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Speedwell</i>, who is sent up for the gratuity given the seamen that brought the King over. He brought me a firkin of butter for my wife, which is very welcome. My father, after dinner, takes leave, after I had given him 40<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> for the last half year for my brother John at Cambridge. I did also make even with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fairbrother for my degree of Master of Arts, which cost me about £9 16<abbr class="currency eoc">s.</abbr><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-647" id="noteref-647" epub:type="noteref">647</a> To White Hall, and my wife with me by water, where at the Privy Seal and elsewhere all the afternoon. At night home with her by water, where I made good sport with having the girl and the boy to comb my head, before I went to bed, in the kitchen.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-8-15">15th</time>. To the office, and after dinner by water to White Hall, where I found the King gone this morning by 5 of the clock to see a Dutch pleasure-boat below bridge,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-648" id="noteref-648" epub:type="noteref">648</a> where he dines, and my Lord with him. The King do tire all his people that are about him with early rising since he came. To the office, all the afternoon I staid there, and in the evening went to Westminster Hall, where I staid at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Michell’s, and with her and her husband sent for some drink, and drank with them. By the same token she and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Murford and another old woman of the Hall were going a gossiping tonight. From thence to my Lord’s, where I found him within, and he did give me direction about his business in his absence, he intending to go into the country tomorrow morning. Here I lay all night in the old chamber which I had now given up to <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Howe, with whom I did intend to lie, but he and I fell to play with one another, so that I made him to go lie with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply. So I lay alone all night.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-8-16">16th</time>. This morning my Lord (all things being ready) carried me by coach to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s, (in the way talking how good he did hope my place would be to me, and in general speaking that it was not the salary of any place that did make a man rich, but the opportunity of getting money while he is in the place) where he took leave, and went into the coach, and so for Hinchinbroke. My Lady Jemimah and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thomas Crew in the coach with him. Hence to Whitehall about noon, where I met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Madge, who took me along with him and Captain Cooke (the famous singer) and other masters of music to dinner at an ordinary about Charing Cross where we dined, all paying their club. Hence to the Privy Seal, where there has been but little work these two days. In the evening home.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-8-17">17th</time>. To the office, and that done home to dinner where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Unthanke, my wife’s tailor, dined with us, we having nothing but a dish of sheep’s trotters. After dinner by water to Whitehall, where a great deal of business at the Privy Seal. At night I and Creed and the judge-Advocate went to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pim, the tailor’s, who took us to the Half Moon, and there did give us great store of wine and anchovies, and would pay for them all. This night I saw <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed show many the strangest emotions to shift off his drink I ever saw in my life. By coach home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-8-18">18th</time>. This morning I took my wife towards Westminster by water, and landed her at Whitefriars, with £5 to buy her a petticoat, and I to the Privy Seal. By and by comes my wife to tell me that my father has persuaded her to buy a most fine cloth of 26<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> a yard, and a rich lace, that the petticoat will come to £5, at which I was somewhat troubled, but she doing it very innocently, I could not be angry. I did give her more money, and sent her away, and I and Creed and Captain Hayward (who is now unkindly put out of the Plymouth to make way for Captain Allen to go to Constantinople, and put into his ship the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Dover</i>, which I know will trouble my Lord) went and dined at the Leg in King Street, where Captain Ferrers, my Lord’s Cornet, comes to us, who after dinner took me and Creed to the Cockpitt play,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-649" id="noteref-649" epub:type="noteref">649</a> the first that I have had time to see since my coming from sea, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Loyall Subject</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-650" id="noteref-650" epub:type="noteref">650</a> where one Kinaston,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-651" id="noteref-651" epub:type="noteref">651</a> a boy, acted the Duke’s sister, but made the loveliest lady that ever I saw in my life, only her voice not very good. After the play done, we three went to drink, and by Captain Ferrers’ means, Kinaston and another that acted Archas, the General, came and drank with us. Hence home by coach, and after being trimmed, leaving my wife to look after her little bitch, which was just now a-whelping, I to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-8-19">19th (Lord’s day)</time>. In the morning my wife tells me that the bitch has whelped four young ones and is very well after it, my wife having had a great fear that she would die thereof, the dog that got them being very big. This morning Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten, Pen, and myself, went to church to the churchwardens, to demand a pew, which at present could not be given us, but we are resolved to have one built. So we staid and heard <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mills,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-652" id="noteref-652" epub:type="noteref">652</a> a very good minister. Home to dinner, where my wife had on her new petticoat that she bought yesterday, which indeed is a very fine cloth and a fine lace; but that being of a light colour, and the lace all silver, it makes no great show. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed and my brother Tom dined with me. After dinner my wife went and fetched the little puppies to us, which are very pretty ones. After they were gone, I went up to put my papers in order, and finding my wife’s clothes lie carelessly laid up, I was angry with her, which I was troubled for. After that my wife and I went and walked in the garden, and so home to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-8-20">20th (Office day)</time>. As Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen and I were walking in the garden, a messenger came to me from the Duke of York to fetch me to the Lord Chancellor. So (<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Turner with her daughter <abbr class="name">The.</abbr> being come to my house to speak with me about a friend of hers to send to sea) I went with her in her coach as far as Worcester House, but my Lord Chancellor being gone to the House of Lords, I went thither, and (there being a law case before them this day) got in, and there staid all the morning, seeing their manner of sitting on woolpacks, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, which I never did before.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-653" id="noteref-653" epub:type="noteref">653</a> After the House was up, I spoke to my Lord, and had order from him to come to him at night. This morning <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed did give me the Papers that concern my Lord’s sea commission, which he left in my hands and went to sea this day to look after the gratuity money. This afternoon at the Privy Seal, where reckoning with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore, he had got £100 for me together, which I was glad of, guessing that the profits of this month would come to £100. In the evening I went all alone to drink at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harper’s, where I found <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Crisp’s daughter, with whom and her friends I staid and drank, and so with <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Hewer by coach to Worcester House, where I light, sending him home with the £100 that I received today. Here I staid, and saw my Lord Chancellor come into his Great Hall, where wonderful how much company there was to expect him at a Seal. Before he would begin any business, he took my papers of the state of the debts of the Fleet, and there viewed them before all the people, and did give me his advice privately how to order things, to get as much money as we can of the Parliament. That being done, I went home, where I found all my things come home from sea (sent by desire by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dun), of which I was glad, though many of my things are quite spoilt with mould by reason of lying so long a shipboard, and my cabin being not tight. I spent much time to dispose of them tonight, and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-8-21">21st</time>. This morning I went to White Hall with Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen by water, who in our passage told me how he was bred up under Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten. We went to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry’s chamber, and consulted of drawing my papers of debts of the Navy against the afternoon for the Committee. So to the Admiralty, where <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Hewer and I did them, and after that he went to his Aunt’s Blackburn (who has a kinswoman dead at her house today, and was to be buried tonight, by which means he staid very late out). I to Westminster Hall, where I met <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew and dined with him, where there dined one <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hickeman,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-654" id="noteref-654" epub:type="noteref">654</a> an Oxford man, who spoke very much against the height of the now old clergy, for putting out many of the religious fellows of Colleges, and inveighing against them for their being drunk, which, if true, I am sorry to hear. After that towards Westminster, where I called on <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pim, and there found my velvet coat (the first that ever I had) done, and a velvet mantle, which I took to the Privy Seal Office, and there locked them up, and went to the Queen’s Court, and there, after much waiting, spoke with Colonel Birch,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-655" id="noteref-655" epub:type="noteref">655</a> who read my papers, and desired some addition, which done I returned to the Privy Seal, where little to do, and with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore towards London, and in our way meeting Monsieur Eschar (<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Montagu’s man), about the Savoy, he took us to the Brazennose Tavern, and there drank and so parted, and I home by coach, and there, it being post-night, I wrote to my Lord to give him notice that all things are well; that General Monk<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-656" id="noteref-656" epub:type="noteref">656</a> is made Lieutenant of Ireland, which my Lord Roberts<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-657" id="noteref-657" epub:type="noteref">657</a> (made Deputy) do not like of, to be Deputy to any man but the King himself. After that to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-8-22">22nd</time>. Office, which done, Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen took me into the garden, and there told me how <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turner do intend to petition the Duke for an allowance extra as one of the Clerks of the Navy, which he desired me to join with him in the furthering of, which I promised to do so that it did not reflect upon me or to my damage to have any other added, as if I was not able to perform my place; which he did wholly disown to be any of his intention, but far from it. I took <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hater home with me to dinner, with whom I did advise, who did give me the same counsel. After dinner he and I to the office about doing something more as to the debts of the Navy than I had done yesterday, and so to Whitehall to the Privy Seal, and having done there, with my father (who came to see me) to Westminster Hall and the Parliament House to look for <abbr>Col.</abbr> Birch, but found him not. In the House, after the Committee was up, I met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Montagu, and joyed him in his entrance (this being his 3d day) for Dover. Here he made me sit all alone in the House, none but he and I, half an hour, discoursing how things stand, and in short he told me how there was like to be many factions at Court between Marquis Ormond,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-658" id="noteref-658" epub:type="noteref">658</a> General Monk, and the Lord Roberts, about the business of Ireland; as there is already between the two Houses about the Act of Indemnity; and in the House of Commons, between the Episcopalian and Presbyterian men. Hence to my father’s (walking with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Herring, the minister of <abbr>St.</abbr> Bride’s), and took them to the Sun Tavern, where I found George, my old drawer, come again. From thence by water, landed them at Blackfriars, and so home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-8-23">23rd</time>. By water to Doctors’ Commons to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Walker,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-659" id="noteref-659" epub:type="noteref">659</a> to give him my Lord’s papers to view over concerning his being empowered to be Vice-Admiral under the Duke of York. There meeting with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pinkney, he and I to a morning draft, and thence by water to White Hall, to the Parliament House, where I spoke with Colonel Birch, and so to the Admiralty chamber, where we and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry had a meeting about several businesses. Amongst others, it was moved that Phineas Pett<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-660" id="noteref-660" epub:type="noteref">660</a> (kinsman to the Commissioner) of Chatham, should be suspended his employment till he had answered some articles put in against him, as that he should formerly say that the King was a bastard and his mother a whore. Hence to Westminster Hall, where I met with my father Bowyer, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Spicer, and them I took to the Leg in King Street, and did give them a dish or two of meat, and so away to the Privy Seal, where, the King being out of town, we have had nothing to do these two days. To Westminster Hall, where I met with <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Symons, <abbr class="name">T.</abbr> Doling, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Booth, and with them to the Dogg, where we eat a musk melon<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-661" id="noteref-661" epub:type="noteref">661</a> (the first that I have eat this year), and were very merry with <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Symons, calling him <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dean, because of the Dean’s lands that his uncle had left him, which are like to be lost all. Hence home by water, and very late at night writing letters to my Lord to Hinchinbroke, and also to the Vice-Admiral in the Downs, and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-8-24">24th</time>. Office, and thence with Sir William Batten and Sir William Pen to the parish church to find out a place where to build a seat or a gallery to sit in, and did find one which is to be done speedily.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-662" id="noteref-662" epub:type="noteref">662</a> Hence with them to dinner at a tavern in Thames Street, where they were invited to a roasted haunch of venison and other very good victuals and company. Hence to Whitehall to the Privy Seal, but nothing to do. At night by land to my father’s, where I found my mother not very well. I did give her a pint of sack. My father came in, and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">T.</abbr> Pepys,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-663" id="noteref-663" epub:type="noteref">663</a> who talked with me in French about looking out for a place for him. But I found him a weak man, and speaks the worst French that ever I heard of one that had been so long beyond sea. Hence into Pant’s Churchyard and bought Barkley’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Argenis</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-664" id="noteref-664" epub:type="noteref">664</a> in Latin, and so home and to bed. I found at home that Captain Burr had sent me 4 dozen bottles of wine today. The King came back to Whitehall tonight.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-8-25">25th</time>. This morning <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turner and I by coach from our office to Whitehall (in our way I calling on <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Walker for the papers I did give him the other day, which he had perused and found that the Duke’s counsel had abated something of the former draught which <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Walker drew for my Lord) to Sir <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Carteret, where we there made up an estimate of the debts of the Navy for the Council. At noon I took <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turner and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore to the Leg in King Street, and did give them a dinner, and afterward to the Sun Tavern, and did give <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turner a glass of wine, there coming to us <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fowler the apothecary (the judge’s son) with a book of lute lessons which his father had left there for me, such as he formerly did use to play when a young man, and had the use of his hand. To the Privy Seal, and found some business now again to do there. To Westminster Hall for a new half-shirt of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lane, and so home by water. Wrote letters by the post to my Lord and to sea. This night <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Hewer brought me home from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pim’s my velvet coat and cap, the first that ever I had. So to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-8-26">26th (Lord’s day)</time>. With Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen to the parish church, where we are placed in the highest pew of all, where a stranger preached a dry and tedious long sermon. Dined at home. To church again in the afternoon with my wife; in the garden and on the leads at night, and so to supper and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-8-27">27th</time>. This morning comes one with a vessel of Northdown ale from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierce, the purser, to me, and after him another with a brave Turkey carpet and a jar of olives from Captain Cuttance, and a pair of fine turtledoves from John Burr to my wife. These things came up today in our smack, and my boy Ely came along with them, and came after office was done to see me. I did give him half a crown because I saw that he was ready to cry to see that he could not be entertained by me here. In the afternoon to the Privy Seal, where good store of work now toward the end of the month. From thence with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mount, Luellin, and others to the Bull head till late, and so home, where about to o’clock Major Hart came to me, whom I did receive with wine and anchovies, which made me so dry that I was ill with them all night, and was fain to have the girle rise and fetch me some drink.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-8-28">28th</time>. At home looking over my papers and books and house as to the fitting of it to my mind till two in the afternoon. Some time I spent this morning beginning to teach my wife some scale in music, and found her apt beyond imagination. To the Privy Seal, where great store of work today. Colonel Scroope<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-665" id="noteref-665" epub:type="noteref">665</a> is this day excepted out of the Act of Indemnity, which has been now long in coming out, but it is expected tomorrow. I carried home £80 from the Privy Seal, by coach, and at night spent a little more time with my wife about her music with great content. This day I heard my poor mother had then two days been very ill, and I fear she will not last long. To bed, a little troubled that I fear my boy Will<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-666" id="noteref-666" epub:type="noteref">666</a> is a thief and has stole some money of mine, particularly a letter that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Jenkins did leave the last week with me with half a crown in it to send to his son.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-8-29">29th (Office day)</time>. Before I went to the office my wife and I examined my boy Will about his stealing of things, but he denied all with the greatest subtlety and confidence in the world. To the office, and after office then to the Church, where we took another view of the place where we had resolved to build a gallery, and have set men about doing it. Home to dinner, and there I found my wife had discovered my boy Will’s theft and a great deal more than we imagined, at which I was vexed and intend to put him away. To my office at the Privy Seal in the afternoon, and from thence at night to the Bull Head, with Mount, Luellin, and others, and hence to my father’s, and he being at my uncle Fenner’s, I went thither to him, and there sent for my boy’s father and talked with him about his son, and had his promise that if I will send home his boy, he will take him notwithstanding his indenture. Home at night, and find that my wife had found out more of the boy’s stealing 6<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> out of <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Hewer’s closet, and hid it in the house of office, at which my heart was troubled. To bed, and caused the boy’s clothes to be brought up to my chamber. But after we were all abed, the wench (which lies in our chamber) called us to listen of a sudden, which put my wife into such a fright that she shook every joint of her, and a long time that I could not get her out of it. The noise was the boy, we did believe, got in a desperate mood out of his bed to do himself or William<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-667" id="noteref-667" epub:type="noteref">667</a> some mischief. But the wench went down and got a candle lighted, and finding the boy in bed, and locking the doors fast, with a candle burning all night, we slept well, but with a great deal of fear.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-8-30">30th</time>. We found all well in the morning below stairs, but the boy in a sad plight of seeming sorrow; but he is the most cunning rogue that ever I met with of his age. To White Hall, where I met with the Act of Indemnity<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-668" id="noteref-668" epub:type="noteref">668</a> (so long talked of and hoped for), with the Act of Rate for Pole-money, an for judicial proceedings. At Westminster Hall I met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Paget the lawyer, and dined with him at Heaven. This afternoon my wife went to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierce’s wife’s child’s christening, and was urged to be godmother, but I advised her beforehand not to do it, so she did not, but as proxy for my Lady Jemimah. This the first day that ever I saw my wife wear black patches since we were married.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-669" id="noteref-669" epub:type="noteref">669</a> My Lord came to town today, but coming not home till very late I staid till 10 at night, and so home on foot. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Childe<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-670" id="noteref-670" epub:type="noteref">670</a> this night at the tavern.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-8-31">31st</time>. Early to wait upon my Lord at White Hall, and with him to the Duke’s chamber. So to my office in Seething Lane. Dined at home, and after dinner to my Lord again, who told me that he is ordered to go suddenly to sea, and did give me some orders to be drawing up against his going. This afternoon I agreed to let my house quite out of my hands to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dalton (one of the wine sellers to the King, with whom I had drunk in the old wine cellar two or three times) for £41. At night made even at Privy Seal for this month against tomorrow to give up possession, but we know not to whom, though we most favour <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bickerstaffe, with whom and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Matthews we drank late after office was done at the Sun, discoursing what to do about it tomorrow against Baron, and so home and to bed. Blessed be God all things continue well with and for me. I pray God fit me for a change of my fortune.</p>
			</article>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
