<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>April 1661</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-16" epub:type="chapter z3998:diary">
			<h2 epub:type="title">April 1661</h2>
			<article id="entry-1661-4-11" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-04-11">April 1st, 1661</time>. This day my waiting at the Privy Seal comes in again. Up early among my workmen. So to the office, and went home to dinner with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten, and after that to the Goat tavern by Charing Cross to meet <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Castle, where he and I drank a pint of wine and talked about Privy Seal business. Then to the Privy Seal Office and there found <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore, but no business yet. Then to Whitefryars, and there saw part of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Rule a Wife and Have a Wife</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-981" id="noteref-981" epub:type="noteref">981</a> which I never saw before, but do not like it. So to my father, and there finding a discontent between my father and mother about the maid (which my father likes and my mother dislikes), I stayed till 10 at night, persuading my mother to understand herself, and that in some high words, which I was sorry for, but she is grown, poor woman, very froward. So leaving them in the same discontent I went away home, it being a brave moonshine, and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1661-4-12" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-04-12">2nd</time>. Among my workmen early and then along with my wife and Pall to my Father’s by coach there to have them lie a while till my house be done. I found my mother alone weeping upon my last night’s quarrel and so left her, and took my wife to Charing Cross and there left her to see her mother who is not well. So I into <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s Park, where I saw the Duke of York playing at Pelemele,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-982" id="noteref-982" epub:type="noteref">982</a> the first time that ever I saw the sport. Then to my Lord’s, where I dined with my Lady, and after we had dined in comes my Lord and Ned Pickering hungry, and there was not a bit of meat left in the house, the servants having eat up all, at which my Lord was very angry, and at last got something dressed. Then to the Privy Seal, and signed some things, and so to White-fryars and saw <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Little Thiefe</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-983" id="noteref-983" epub:type="noteref">983</a> which is a very merry and pretty play, and the little boy do very well. Then to my Father’s, where I found my mother and my wife in a very good mood, and so left them and went home. Then to the Dolphin to Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten, and Penn, and other company; among others <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Delabar; where strange how these men, who at other times are all wise men, do now, in their drink, betwit and reproach one another with their former conditions, and their actions as in public concernments, till I was ashamed to see it. But parted all friends at 12 at night after drinking a great deal of wine. So home and alone to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1661-4-13" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-04-13">3rd</time>. Up among my workmen, my head aching all day from last night’s debauch. To the office all the morning, and at noon dined with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten and Penn, who would needs have me drink two drafts of sack today to cure me of last night’s disease, which I thought strange but I think find it true.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-984" id="noteref-984" epub:type="noteref">984</a> Then home with my workmen all the afternoon, at night into the garden to play on my flageolet, it being moonshine, where I stayed a good while, and so home and to bed. This day I hear that the Dutch have sent the King a great present of money, which we think will stop the match with Portugal; and judge this to be the reason that our so great haste in sending the two ships to the East Indies is also stayed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1661-4-14" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-04-14">4th</time>. To my workmen, then to my Lord’s, and there dined with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shepley. After dinner I went in to my Lord and there we had a great deal of music, and then came my cousin Tom Pepys and there did accept of the security which we gave him for his £1,000 that we borrow of him, and so the money to be paid next week. Then to the Privy Seal, and so with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore to my father’s, where some friends did sup there and we with them and late went home, leaving my wife still there. So to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1661-4-15" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-04-15">5th</time>. Up among my workmen and so to the office, and then to Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn’s with the other Sir William and Sir John Lawson to dinner, and after that, with them to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lucy’s, a merchant, where much good company, and there drank a great deal of wine, and in discourse fell to talk of the weight of people, which did occasion some wagers, and where, among others, I won half a piece to be spent. Then home, and at night to Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten’s, and there very merry with a good barrell of oysters, and this is the present life I lead. Home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1661-4-16" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-04-16">6th</time>. Up among my workmen, then to Whitehall, and there at Privy Seal and elsewhere did business, and among other things met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Townsend, who told of his mistake the other day, to put both his legs through one of his knees of his breeches, and went so all day. Then with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed and Moore to the Leg in the Palace to dinner which I gave them, and after dinner I saw the girl of the house, being very pretty, go into a chamber, and I went in after her and kissed her. Then by water, Creed and I, to Salisbury Court and there saw <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Love’s Quarrell</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-985" id="noteref-985" epub:type="noteref">985</a> acted the first time, but I do not like the design or words. So calling at my father’s, where they and my wife well, and so home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1661-4-17" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-04-17">7th (Lord’s day)</time>. All the morning at home making up my accounts (God forgive me!) to give up to my Lord this afternoon. Then about 11 o’clock out of doors towards Westminster and put in at Paul’s, where I saw our minister, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mills, preaching before my Lord Mayor. So to Whitehall, and there I met with <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Fuller of Twickenham, newly come from Ireland; and took him to my Lord’s, where he and I dined; and he did give my Lord and me a good account of the condition of Ireland, and how it come to pass, through the joining of the Fanatics and the Presbyterians, that the latter and the former are in their declaration put together under the names of Fanatics. After dinner, my Lord and I and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shepley did look over our accounts and settle matters of money between us; and my Lord did tell me much of his mind about getting money and other things of his family, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> Then to my father’s, where I found <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hunt and his wife at supper with my father and mother and my wife, where after supper I left them and so home, and then I went to Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten’s and resolved of a journey tomorrow to Chatham, and so home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1661-4-18" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-04-18">8th</time>. Up early, my Lady Batten knocking at her door that comes into one of my chambers. I did give directions to my people and workmen, and so about 8 o’clock we took barge at the Tower, Sir William Batten and his lady, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Turner, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fowler and I. A very pleasant passage and so to Gravesend, where we dined, and from thence a coach took them and me, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fowler with some others came from Rochester to meet us, on horseback. At Rochester, where alight at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Alcock’s and there drank and had good sport, with his bringing out so many sorts of cheese. Then to the Hillhouse at Chatham,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-986" id="noteref-986" epub:type="noteref">986</a> where I never was before, and I found a pretty pleasant house and am pleased with the arms that hang up there. Here we supped very merry, and late to bed; Sir William telling me that old Edgeborrow,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-987" id="noteref-987" epub:type="noteref">987</a> his predecessor, did die and walk in my chamber, did make me some what afeard, but not so much as for mirth’s sake I did seem. So to bed in the treasurer’s chamber.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1661-4-19" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-04-19">9th</time>. And lay and slept well till 3 in the morning, and then waking, and by the light of the moon I saw my pillow (which overnight I flung from me) stand upright, but not bethinking myself what it might be, I was a little afeard, but sleep overcame all and so lay till high morning, at which time I had a candle brought me and a good fire made, and in general it was a great pleasure all the time I stayed here to see how I am respected and honoured by all people; and I find that I begin to know now how to receive so much reverence, which at the beginning I could not tell how to do. Sir William and I by coach to the dock and there viewed all the storehouses and the old goods that are this day to be sold, which was great pleasure to me, and so back again by coach home, where we had a good dinner, and among other strangers that come, there was <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hempson and his wife, a pretty woman, and speaks Latin; <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Allen and two daughters of his, both very tall and the youngest very handsome,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-988" id="noteref-988" epub:type="noteref">988</a> so much as I could not forbear to love her exceedingly, having, among other things, the best hand that ever I saw. After dinner, we went to fit books and things (Tom Hater being this morning come to us) for the sale, by an inch of candle, and very good sport we and the ladies that stood by had, to see the people bid. Among other things sold there was all the State’s arms,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-989" id="noteref-989" epub:type="noteref">989</a> which Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten bought; intending to set up some of the images in his garden, and the rest to burn on the Coronacion night. The sale being done, the ladies and I and Captain Pett<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-990" id="noteref-990" epub:type="noteref">990</a> and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Castle took barge and down we went to see the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Sovereign</i>, which we did, taking great pleasure therein, singing all the way, and, among other pleasures, I put my Lady, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Turner, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hempson, and the two <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Allens into the lantern and I went in and kissed them, demanding it as a fee due to a principall officer, with all which we were exceeding merry, and drunk some bottles of wine and neat’s tongue, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> Then back again home and so supped, and after much mirth to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1661-4-20" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-04-20">10th</time>. In the morning to see the Dockhouses. First, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pett’s, the builder, and there was very kindly received, and among other things he did offer my Lady Batten a parrot, the best I ever saw, that knew Mingo<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-991" id="noteref-991" epub:type="noteref">991</a> so soon as it saw him, having been bred formerly in the house with them; but for talking and singing I never heard the like. My Lady did accept of it. Then to see Commissioner Pett’s house, he and his family being absent, and here I wondered how my Lady Batten walked up and down with envious looks to see how neat and rich everything is (and indeed both the house and garden is most handsome), saying that she would get it, for it belonged formerly to the Surveyor of the Navy. Then on board the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Prince</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-992" id="noteref-992" epub:type="noteref">992</a> now in the dock, and indeed it has one and no more rich cabins for carved work, but no gold in her. After that back home, and there eat a little dinner. Then to Rochester, and there saw the Cathedrall, which is now fitting for use, and the organ then a-tuning. Then away thence, observing the great doors of the church, which, they say, was covered with the skins of the Danes,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-993" id="noteref-993" epub:type="noteref">993</a> and also had much mirth at a tomb, on which was “Come sweet Jesu,” and I read “Come sweet Mall,” <abbr>etc.</abbr>, at which Captain Pett and I had good laughter. So to the Salutacion tavern, where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Alcock and many of the town came and entertained us with wine and oysters and other things, and hither come Sir John Minnes<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-994" id="noteref-994" epub:type="noteref">994</a> to us, who is come today to see the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Henery</i>, in which he intends to ride as Vice-Admiral in the narrow seas all this summer. Here much mirth, but I was a little troubled to stay too long, because of going to Hempson’s, which afterwards we did, and found it in all things a most pretty house, and rarely furnished, only it had a most ill access on all sides to it, which is a greatest fault that I think can be in a house. Here we had, for my sake, two fiddles, the one a bass viol, on which he that played, played well some lyra lessons, but both together made the worst music that ever I heard. We had a fine collacion, but I took little pleasure in that, for the illness of the music and for the intentness of my mind upon <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Rebecca Allen. After we had done eating, the ladies went to dance, and among the men we had, I was forced to dance too; and did make an ugly shift. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Allen danced very well, and seems the best humoured woman that ever I saw. About 9 o’clock Sir William and my Lady went home, and we continued dancing an hour or two, and so broke up very pleasant and merry, and so walked home, I leading <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Rebecca, who seemed, I know not why, in that and other things, to be desirous of my favours and would in all things show me respects. Going home, she would needs have me sing, and I did pretty well and was highly esteemed by them. So to Captain Allen’s (where we were last night, and heard him play on the harpsicon, and I find him to be a perfect good musician), and there, having no mind to leave <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Rebecca, what with talk and singing (her father and I), <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Turner and I stayed there till 2 o’clock in the morning and was most exceeding merry, and I had the opportunity of kissing <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Rebecca very often. Among other things Captain Pett was saying that he thought that he had got his wife with child since I came thither. Which I took hold of and was merrily asking him what he would take to have it said for my honour that it was of my getting? He merrily answered that he would if I would promise to be godfather to it if it did come within the time just, and I said that I would. So that I must remember to compute it when the time comes.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1661-4-21" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-04-21">11th</time>. At 2 o’clock, with very great mirth, we went to our lodging and to bed, and lay till 7, and then called up by Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten, so I arose and we did some business, and then came <abbr>Captn.</abbr> Allen, and he and I withdrew and sang a song or two, and among others took pleasure in “Goe and bee hanged, that’s goodbye.” The young ladies come too, and so I did again please myself with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Rebecca, and about 9 o’clock, after we had breakfasted, we sett forth for London, and indeed I was a little troubled to part with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Rebecca, for which God forgive me. Thus we went away through Rochester, calling and taking leave of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Alcock at the door, <abbr>Capt.</abbr> Cuttance going with us. We baited at Dartford, and thence to London, but of all the journeys that ever I made this was the merriest, and I was in a strange mood for mirth. Among other things, I got my Lady to let her maid, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Anne, to ride all the way on horseback, and she rides exceeding well; and so I called her my clerk, that she went to wait upon me. I met two little schoolboys going with pitchers of ale to their schoolmaster to break up against Easter, and I did drink of some of one of them and give him two pence. By and by we come to two little girls keeping cows, and I saw one of them very pretty, so I had a mind to make her ask my blessing, and telling her that I was her godfather, she asked me innocently whether I was not Ned Wooding, and I said that I was, so she kneeled down and very simply called, “Pray, godfather, pray to God to bless me,” which made us very merry, and I gave her twopence. In several places, I asked women whether they would sell me their children, but they denied me all, but said they would give me one to keep for them, if I would. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Anne and I rode under the man that hangs upon Shooter’s Hill,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-995" id="noteref-995" epub:type="noteref">995</a> and a filthy sight it was to see how his flesh is shrunk to his bones. So home and I found all well, and a deal of work done since I went. I sent to see how my wife do, who is well, and my brother John come from Cambridge. To Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten’s and there supped, and very merry with the young ladies. So to bed very sleepy for last night’s work, concluding that it is the pleasantest journey in all respects that ever I had in my life.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1661-4-22" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-04-22">12th</time>. Up among my workmen, and about 7 o’clock comes my wife to see me and my brother John with her, who I am glad to see, but I sent them away because of going to the office, and there dined with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten, all fish dinner, it being Good Friday. Then home and looking over my workmen, and then into the City and saw in what forwardness all things are for the Coronacion, which will be very magnificent. Then back again home and to my chamber, to set down in my diary all my late journey, which I do with great pleasure; and while I am now writing comes one with a tickett to invite me to Captain Robert Blake’s buriall, for whose death I am very sorry, and do much wonder at it, he being a little while since a very likely man to live as any I knew. Since my going out of town, there is one Alexander Rosse taken and sent to the Counter by Sir Thomas Allen, for counterfeiting my hand to a ticket, and we this day at the office have given order to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Smith to prosecute him. To bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1661-4-23" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-04-23">13th</time>. To Whitehall by water from Towre-wharf, where we could not pass the ordinary way, because they were mending of the great stone steps against the Coronacion. With Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn, then to my Lord’s, and thence with <abbr>Capt.</abbr> Cuttance and <abbr>Capt.</abbr> Clark to drink our morning draught together, and before we could get back again my Lord was gone out. So to Whitehall again and, met with my Lord above with the Duke; and after a little talk with him, I went to the Banquethouse, and there saw the King heal, the first time that ever I saw him do it; which he did with great gravity, and it seemed to me to be an ugly office and a simple one. That done to my Lord’s and dined there, and so by water with parson Turner<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-996" id="noteref-996" epub:type="noteref">996</a> towards London, and upon my telling of him of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore to be a fit man to do his business with Bishop Wren,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-997" id="noteref-997" epub:type="noteref">997</a> about which he was going, he went back out of my boat into another to Whitehall, and so I forwards home and there by and by took coach with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn and Captain Terne and went to the buriall of Captain Robert Blake, at Wapping, and there had each of us a ring, but it being dirty, we would not go to church with them, but with our coach we returned home, and there stayed a little, and then he and I alone to the Dolphin (Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten being this day gone with his wife to Walthamstow to keep Easter), and there had a supper by ourselves, we both being very hungry, and staying there late drinking I became very sleepy, and so we went home and I to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1661-4-24" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-04-24">14th (Easter</time>. Lord’s day). In the morning towards my father’s, and by the way heard <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Jacomb,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-998" id="noteref-998" epub:type="noteref">998</a> at Ludgate, upon these words, “Christ loved you and therefore let us love one another,” and made a lazy sermon, like a Presbyterian. Then to my father’s and dined there, and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Fairbrother (lately come to town) with us. After dinner I went to the Temple and there heard <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Griffith,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-999" id="noteref-999" epub:type="noteref">999</a> a good sermon for the day; so with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore (whom I met there) to my Lord’s, and there he showed me a copy of my Lord Chancellor’s patent for Earl, and I read the preamble, which is very short, modest, and good. Here my Lord saw us and spoke to me about getting <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore to come and govern his house while he goes to sea, which I promised him to do and did afterwards speak to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore, and he is willing. Then hearing that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Barnwell<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1000" id="noteref-1000" epub:type="noteref">1000</a> was come, with some of my Lord’s little children, yesterday to town, to see the Coronacion, I went and found them at the Goat, at Charing Cross, and there I went and drank with them a good while, whom I found in very good health and very merry. Then to my father’s, and after supper seemed willing to go home, and my wife seeming to be so too I went away in a discontent, but she, poor wretch, followed me as far in the rain and dark as Fleet Bridge to fetch me back again, and so I did, and lay with her tonight, which I have not done these eight or ten days before.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1661-4-25" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-04-25">15th</time>. From my father’s, it being a very foul morning for the King and Lords to go to Windsor, I went to the office and there met <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry and Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Robt.</abbr> Slingsby, but did no business, but only appoint to go to Deptford together tomorrow. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry being gone, and I having at home laid up £200 which I had brought this morning home from Alderman Backwell’s, I went home by coach with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Slingsby and dined with him, and had a very good dinner. His lady<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1001" id="noteref-1001" epub:type="noteref">1001</a> seems a good woman and very desirous they were to hear this noon by the post how the election has gone at Newcastle,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1002" id="noteref-1002" epub:type="noteref">1002</a> wherein he is concerned, but the letters are not come yet. To my uncle Wight’s, and after a little stay with them he and I to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rawlinson’s, and there stayed all the afternoon, it being very foul, and had a little talk with him what good I might make of these ships that go to Portugal by venturing some money by them, and he will give me an answer to it shortly. So home and sent for the Barber, and after that to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1661-4-26" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-04-26">16th</time>. So soon as word was brought me that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry was come with the barge to the Towre, I went to him, and found him reading of the Psalms in short hand (which he is now busy about), and had good sport about the long marks that are made there for sentences in divinity, which he is never like to make use of. Here he and I sat till the Comptroller came and then we put off for Deptford, where we went on board the King’s pleasure boat that Commissioner Pett is making, and indeed it will be a most pretty thing. From thence to Commr. Pett’s lodging, and there had a good breakfast, and in came the two Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Wms.</abbr> from Walthamstow, and so we sat down and did a great deal of public business about the fitting of the fleet that is now going out. That done we went to the Globe and there had a good dinner, and by and by took barge again and so home. By the way they would have me sing, which I did to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry, who went up to Sir William Batten’s, and there we stayed and talked a good while, and then broke up and I home, and then to my father’s and there lay with my wife.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1661-4-27" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-04-27">17th</time>. By land and saw the arches,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1003" id="noteref-1003" epub:type="noteref">1003</a> which are now almost done and are very fine, and I saw the picture of the ships and other things this morning, set up before the East Indy House,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1004" id="noteref-1004" epub:type="noteref">1004</a> which are well done. So to the office, and that being done I went to dinner with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten, and then home to my workmen, and saw them go on with great content to me. Then comes <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Allen of Chatham, and I took him to the Mitre and there did drink with him, and did get of him the song that pleased me so well there the other day, “Of Shitten come Shites the beginning of love.” His daughters are to come to town tomorrow, but I know not whether I shall see them or no. That done I went to the Dolphin by appointment and there I met Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Wms.</abbr> both and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Castle, and did eat a barrel of oysters and two lobsters, which I did give them, and were very merry. Here we had great talk of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Warren’s being knighted by the King, and Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W. B.</abbr> seemed to be very much incensed against him. So home.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1661-4-28" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-04-28">18th</time>. Up with my workmen and then about 9 o’clock took horse with both the Sir Williams for Walthamstow, and there we found my Lady and her daughters all; and a pleasant day it was, and all things else, but that my Lady was in a bad mood, which we were troubled at, and had she been noble she would not have been so with her servants, when we came thither, and this Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn took notice of, as well as I. After dinner we all went to the Church stile,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1005" id="noteref-1005" epub:type="noteref">1005</a> and there eat and drank, and I was as merry as I could counterfeit myself to be. Then, it raining hard, we left Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten, and we two returned and called at <abbr>Mr.</abbr>⁠⸻, and drank some brave wine there, and then homewards again and in our way met with two country fellows upon one horse, which I did, without much ado, give the way to, but Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn would not, but struck them and they him, and so passed away, but they giving him some high words, he went back again and struck them off their horse, in a simple fury, and without much honour, in my mind, and so came away. Home, and I sat with him a good while talking, and then home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1661-4-29" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-04-29">19th</time>. Among my workmen and then to the office, and after that dined with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten, and then home, where Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Warren came, and I took him and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shepley and Moore with me to the Mitre, and there I cleared with Warren for the deals I bought lately for my Lord of him, and he went away, and we stayed afterwards a good while and talked, and so parted, it being so foul that I could not go to Whitehall to see the Knights of the Bath<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1006" id="noteref-1006" epub:type="noteref">1006</a> made today, which do trouble me mightily. So home, and having stayed awhile till Will came in (with whom I was vexed for staying abroad), he comes and then I went by water to my father’s, and then after supper to bed with my wife.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1661-4-30" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-04-30">20th</time>. Here comes my boy to tell me that the Duke of York had sent for all the principal officers, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, to come to him today. So I went by water to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry’s, and there stayed and talked a good while with him till all the rest come. We went up and saw the Duke dress himself, and in his night habit he is a very plain man. Then he sent us to his closet, where we saw among other things two very fine chests, covered with gold and Indian varnish, given him by the East Indy Company of Holland. The Duke comes; and after he had told us that the fleet was designed for Algier (which was kept from us till now), we did advise about many things as to the fitting of the fleet, and so went away. And from thence to the Privy Seal, where little to do, and after that took <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed and Moore and gave them their morning draught, and after that to my Lord’s, where Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn came to me, and dined with my Lord. After dinner he and others that dined there went away, and then my Lord looked upon his pages’ and footmen’s liveries, which are come home today, and will be handsome, though not gaudy. Then with my Lady and my Lady Wright to Whitehall; and in the Banqueting-house saw the King create my Lord Chancellor and several others, Earls,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1007" id="noteref-1007" epub:type="noteref">1007</a> and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew and several others, Barons:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1008" id="noteref-1008" epub:type="noteref">1008</a> the first being led up by Heralds and five old Earls to the King, and there the patent is read, and the King puts on his vest, and sword, and coronet, and gives him the patent. And then he kisseth the King’s hand, and rises and stands covered before the king. And the same for the Barons, only he is led up but by three of the old Barons, and are girt with swords before they go to the King. That being done (which was very pleasant to see their habits), I carried my Lady back, and I found my Lord angry, for that his page had let my Lord’s new beaver be changed for an old hat; then I went away, and with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed to the Exchange and bought some things, as gloves and bandstrings, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> So back to the Cockpit,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1009" id="noteref-1009" epub:type="noteref">1009</a> and there, by the favour of one <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bowman, he and I got in, and there saw the King and Duke of York and his Duchess (which is a plain woman, and like her mother, my Lady Chancellor). And so saw <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Humersome Lieutenant</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1010" id="noteref-1010" epub:type="noteref">1010</a> acted before the King, but not very well done. But my pleasure was great to see the manner of it, and so many great beauties, but above all <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Palmer, with whom the King do discover a great deal of familiarity. So <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed and I (the play being done) went to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Harper’s, and there sat and drank, it being about twelve at night. The ways being now so dirty, and stopped up with the rayles which are this day set up in the streets, I would not go home, but went with him to his lodging at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ware’s, and there lay all night.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1661-5-1" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-05-01">21st (Lord’s day)</time>. In the morning we were troubled to hear it rain as it did, because of the great show tomorrow. After I was ready I walked to my father’s and there found the late maid to be gone and another come by my mother’s choice, which my father do not like, and so great difference there will be between my father and mother about it. Here dined Doctor <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Thos.</abbr> Pepys and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Fairbrother; and all our talk about tomorrow’s show, and our trouble that it is like to be a wet day. After dinner comes in my <abbr>coz.</abbr> Snow and his wife, and I think stay there till the show be over. Then I went home, and all the way is so thronged with people to see the triumphal arches, that I could hardly pass for them. So home, people being at church, and I got home unseen, and so up to my chamber and saw done these last five or six days’ diaries. My mind a little troubled about my workmen, which, being foreigners<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1011" id="noteref-1011" epub:type="noteref">1011</a> are like to be troubled by a couple of lazy rogues that worked with me the other day, that are citizens, and so my work will be hindered, but I must prevent it if I can.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1661-5-2" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<header>
					<p><time datetime="1661-05-02">22nd</time>. King’s Going from Y<sup>e</sup> Tower to Whitehall.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1012" id="noteref-1012" epub:type="noteref">1012</a></p>
				</header>
				<p>Up early and made myself as fine as I could, and put on my velvet coat, the first day that I put it on, though made half a year ago. And being ready, Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten, my Lady, and his two daughters and his son and wife, and Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn and his son and I, went to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Young’s, the flag-maker, in Corne-hill,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1013" id="noteref-1013" epub:type="noteref">1013</a> and there we had a good room to ourselves, with wine and good cake, and saw the show very well. In which it is impossible to relate the glory of this day, expressed in the clothes of them that rid, and their horses and horses-clothes, among others, my Lord Sandwich’s. Embroidery and diamonds were ordinary among them. The Knights of the Bath was a brave sight of itself; and their Esquires, among which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Armiger was an Esquire to one of the Knights. Remarquable were the two men that represent the two Dukes of Normandy and Aquitane.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1014" id="noteref-1014" epub:type="noteref">1014</a> The Bishops come next after Barons, which is the higher place; which makes me think that the next Parliament they will be called to the House of Lords. My Lord Monk rode bare after the King, and led in his hand a spare horse, as being Master of the Horse. The King, in a most rich embroidered suit and cloak, looked most noble. Wadlow,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1015" id="noteref-1015" epub:type="noteref">1015</a> the vintner, at the Devil,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1016" id="noteref-1016" epub:type="noteref">1016</a> in Fleet-street, did lead a fine company of soldiers, all young comely men, in white doublets. There followed the Vice-Chamberlain, Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Carteret, a company of men all like Turks;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1017" id="noteref-1017" epub:type="noteref">1017</a> but I know not yet what they are for. The streets all gravelled, and the houses hung with carpets before them, made brave show, and the ladies out of the windows, one of which over against us I took much notice of, and spoke of her, which made good sport among us. So glorious was the show with gold and silver, that we were not able to look at it, our eyes at last being so much overcome with it. Both the King and the Duke of York took notice of us, as he saw us at the window. The show being ended, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Young did give us a dinner, at which we were very merry, and pleased above imagination at what we have seen. Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten going home, he and I called and drunk some mum<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1018" id="noteref-1018" epub:type="noteref">1018</a> and laid our wager about my Lady Faulconbridge’s name,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1019" id="noteref-1019" epub:type="noteref">1019</a> which he says not to be Mary, and so I won above 20<abbr>s.</abbr> So home, where Will and the boy stayed and saw the show upon Towre Hill, and Jane at <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T.</abbr> Pepys’s, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">The.</abbr> Turner, and my wife at Charles Glassecocke’s, in Fleet Street. In the evening by water to Whitehall to my Lord’s, and there I spoke with my Lord. He talked with me about his suit, which was made in France, and cost him £200, and very rich it is with embroidery. I lay with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shepley, and⁠ ⁠…</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1661-5-3" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<header>
					<p>
						<b>Coronac̃on Day.</b>
					</p>
				</header>
				<p><time datetime="1661-05-03">23rd</time>⁠ ⁠… about 4 I rose and got to the Abbey, where I followed Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Denham,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1020" id="noteref-1020" epub:type="noteref">1020</a> the Surveyor, with some company that he was leading in. And with much ado, by the favour of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cooper, his man, did get up into a great scaffold across the North end of the Abbey, where with a great deal of patience I sat from past 4 till 11 before the King came in. And a great pleasure it was to see the Abbey raised in the middle, all covered with red, and a throne (that is a chair)<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1021" id="noteref-1021" epub:type="noteref">1021</a> and footstool on the top of it; and all the officers of all kinds, so much as the very fidlers, in red vests. At last comes in the Dean<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1022" id="noteref-1022" epub:type="noteref">1022</a> and Prebends of Westminster, with the Bishops (many of them in cloth of gold copes), and after them the Nobility, all in their Parliament robes, which was a most magnificent sight. Then the Duke, and the King with a scepter<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1023" id="noteref-1023" epub:type="noteref">1023</a> (carried by my Lord Sandwich) and sword and mond<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1024" id="noteref-1024" epub:type="noteref">1024</a> before him, and the crown too. The King in his robes, bareheaded, which was very fine. And after all had placed themselves, there was a sermon and the service; and then in the Quire at the high altar, the King passed through all the ceremonies of the Coronac̃on, which to my great grief I and most in the Abbey could not see. The crown being put upon his head, a great shout begun, and he came forth to the throne, and there passed more ceremonies: as taking the oath, and having things read to him by the Bishop;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1025" id="noteref-1025" epub:type="noteref">1025</a> and his lords (who put on their caps as soon as the King put on his crown)<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1026" id="noteref-1026" epub:type="noteref">1026</a> and bishops come, and kneeled before him. And three times the King at Arms<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1027" id="noteref-1027" epub:type="noteref">1027</a> went to the three open places on the scaffold,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1028" id="noteref-1028" epub:type="noteref">1028</a> and proclaimed, that if anyone could show any reason why Charles Stewart should not be King of England, that now he should come and speak. And a General Pardon also was read by the Lord Chancellor, and meddalls flung up and down by my Lord Cornwallis,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1029" id="noteref-1029" epub:type="noteref">1029</a> of silver, but I could not come by any. But so great a noise that I could make but little of the music; and indeed, it was lost to everybody. But I had so great a lust to⁠ ⁠… that I went out a little while before the King had done all his ceremonies, and went round the Abbey to Westminster Hall, all the way within rayles, and 10,000 people, with the ground covered with blue cloth; and scaffolds all the way. Into the Hall I got, where it was very fine with hangings and scaffolds one upon another full of brave ladies; and my wife in one little one, on the right hand. Here I stayed walking up and down, and at last upon one of the side stalls I stood and saw the King come in with all the persons (but the soldiers) that were yesterday in the cavalcade; and a most pleasant sight it was to see them in their several robes. And the King came in with his crown on, and his sceptre in his hand, under a canopy borne up by six silver staves, carried by Barons of the Cinque Ports,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1030" id="noteref-1030" epub:type="noteref">1030</a> and little bells at every end. And after a long time, he got up to the farther end, and all set themselves down at their several tables; and that was also a brave sight: and the King’s first course carried up by the Knights of the Bath. And many fine ceremonies there was of the Heralds leading up people before him, and bowing; and my Lord of Albemarle’s going to the kitchin and eat a bit of the first dish that was to go to the King’s table. But, above all, was these three Lords, Northumberland,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1031" id="noteref-1031" epub:type="noteref">1031</a> and Suffolk,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1032" id="noteref-1032" epub:type="noteref">1032</a> and the Duke of Ormond,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1033" id="noteref-1033" epub:type="noteref">1033</a> coming before the courses on horseback, and staying so all dinnertime, and at last to bring up [Dymock]<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1034" id="noteref-1034" epub:type="noteref">1034</a> the King’s Champion, all in armour on horseback, with his spear and targett carried before him. And a Herald<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1035" id="noteref-1035" epub:type="noteref">1035</a> proclaims “That if any dare deny Charles Stewart to be lawful King of England, here was a Champion that would fight with him;”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1036" id="noteref-1036" epub:type="noteref">1036</a> and with these words, the Champion flings down his gauntlet, and all this he do three times in his going up towards the King’s table. At last when he is come, the King drinks to him, and then sends him the cup which is of gold, and he drinks it off, and then rides back again with the cup in his hand. I went from table to table to see the Bishops and all others at their dinner, and was infinitely pleased with it. And at the Lords’ table, I met with William Howe, and he spoke to my Lord for me, and he did give me four rabbits and a pullet, and so I got it and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed and I got <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Michell to give us some bread, and so we at a stall eat it, as everybody else did what they could get. I took a great deal of pleasure to go up and down, and look upon the ladies, and to hear the music of all sorts, but above all, the 24 violins.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1037" id="noteref-1037" epub:type="noteref">1037</a> About six at night they had dined, and I went up to my wife, and there met with a pretty lady (<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Frankleyn, a Doctor’s wife, a friend of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bowyer’s), and kissed them both, and by and by took them down to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bowyer’s. And strange it is to think, that these two days have held up fair till now that all is done, and the King gone out of the Hall; and then it fell a-raining and thundering and lightening as I have not seen it do for some years:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1038" id="noteref-1038" epub:type="noteref">1038</a> which people did take great notice of; God’s blessing of the work of these two days, which is a foolery to take too much notice of such things. I observed little disorder in all this, but only the King’s footmen had got hold of the canopy, and would keep it from the Barons of the Cinque Ports,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1039" id="noteref-1039" epub:type="noteref">1039</a> which they endeavoured to force from them again, but could not do it till my Lord Duke of Albemarle caused it to be put into Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Pye’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1040" id="noteref-1040" epub:type="noteref">1040</a> hand till tomorrow to be decided. At <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bowyer’s; a great deal of company, some I knew, others I did not. Here we stayed upon the leads and below till it was late, expecting to see the fireworks, but they were not performed tonight: only the City had a light like a glory round about it with bonfires. At last I went to Kingstreet, and there sent Crockford to my father’s and my house, to tell them I could not come home tonight, because of the dirt, and a coach could not be had. And so after drinking a pot of ale alone at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Harper’s I returned to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bowyer’s, and after a little stay more I took my wife and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Frankleyn (who I proffered the civility of lying with my wife at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hunt’s tonight) to Axe-yard, in which at the further end there were three great bonfires, and a great many great gallants, men and women; and they laid hold of us, and would have us drink the King’s health upon our knees, kneeling upon a faggot, which we all did, they drinking to us one after another. Which we thought a strange frolic; but these gallants continued thus a great while, and I wondered to see how the ladies did tipple. At last I sent my wife and her bedfellow to bed, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hunt and I went in with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thornbury (who did give the company all their wine, he being yeoman of the wine-cellar to the King) to his house; and there, with his wife and two of his sisters, and some gallant sparks that were there, we drank the King’s health, and nothing else, till one of the gentlemen fell down stark drunk, and there lay spewing; and I went to my Lord’s pretty well. But no sooner abed with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shepley but my head began to hum, and I to vomit, and if ever I was foxed it was now, which I cannot say yet, because I fell asleep and slept till morning. Only when I waked I found myself wet with my spewing. Thus did the day end with joy everywhere; and blessed be God, I have not heard of any mischance to anybody through it all, but only to <abbr>Serj<sup>t</sup>.</abbr> Glynne,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1041" id="noteref-1041" epub:type="noteref">1041</a> whose horse fell upon him yesterday, and is like to kill him, which people do please themselves to see how just God is to punish the rogue at such a time as this; he being now one of the King’s Serjeants, and rode in the cavalcade with Maynard,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1042" id="noteref-1042" epub:type="noteref">1042</a> to whom people wish the same fortune. There was also this night in King-street, [a woman] had her eye put out by a boy’s flinging a firebrand into the coach. Now, after all this, I can say that, besides the pleasure of the sight of these glorious things, I may now shut my eyes against any other objects, nor for the future trouble myself to see things of state and show, as being sure never to see the like again in this world.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1661-5-4" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-05-04">24th</time>. Waked in the morning with my head in a sad taking through the last night’s drink, which I am very sorry for; so rose and went out with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed to drink our morning draft, which he did give me in chocolate<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1043" id="noteref-1043" epub:type="noteref">1043</a> to settle my stomach. And after that I to my wife, who lay with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Frankelyn at the next door to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hunt’s, and they were ready, and so I took them up in a coach, and carried the ladies to Paul’s, and there set her down, and so my wife and I home, and I to the office. That being done my wife and I went to dinner to Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten, and all our talk about the happy conclusion of these last solemnities. After dinner home, and advised with my wife about ordering things in my house, and then she went away to my father’s to lie, and I stayed with my workmen, who do please me very well with their work. At night, set myself to write down these three days’ diary, and while I am about it, I hear the noise of the chambers<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1044" id="noteref-1044" epub:type="noteref">1044</a> and other things of the fireworks, which are now playing upon the Thames before the King; and I wish myself with them, being sorry not to see them. So to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1661-5-5" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-05-05">25th</time>. All the morning with my workmen with great pleasure to see them near coming to an end. At noon <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore and I went to an Ordinary at the King’s Head in Towre Street,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1045" id="noteref-1045" epub:type="noteref">1045</a> and there had a dirty dinner. Afterwards home and having done some business with him, in comes <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply and Pierce the surgeon, and they and I to the Mitre and there stayed a while and drank, and so home and after a little reading to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1661-5-6" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-05-06">26th</time>. At the office all the morning, and at noon dined by myself at home on a piece of meat from the cook’s, and so at home all the afternoon with my workmen, and at night to bed, having some thoughts to order my business so as to go to Portsmouth the next week with Sir Robert Slingsby.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1661-5-7" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-05-07">27th</time>. In the morning to my Lord’s, and there dined with my Lady, and after dinner with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed and Captain Ferrers to the Theatre to see <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Chances</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1046" id="noteref-1046" epub:type="noteref">1046</a> and after that to the Cock alehouse,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1047" id="noteref-1047" epub:type="noteref">1047</a> where we had a harp and violin played to us, and so home by coach to Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten’s, who seems so inquisitive when my house will be made an end of that I am troubled to go thither. So home with some trouble in my mind about it.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1661-5-8" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-05-08">28th (Lord’s day)</time>. In the morning to my father’s, where I dined, and in the afternoon to their church, where come <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Turner and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Edward Pepys,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1048" id="noteref-1048" epub:type="noteref">1048</a> and several other ladies, and so I went out of the pew into another. And after sermon home with them, and there stayed a while and talked with them and was sent for to my father’s, where my cousin Angier and his wife, of Cambridge, to whom I went, and was glad to see them, and sent for wine for them, and they supped with my father. After supper my father told me of an odd passage the other night in bed between my mother and him, and she would not let him come to bed to her out of jealousy of him and an ugly wench that lived there lately, the most ill-favoured slut that ever I saw in my life, which I was ashamed to hear that my mother should be become such a fool, and my father bid me to take notice of it to my mother, and to make peace between him and her. All which do trouble me very much. So to bed to my wife.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1661-5-9" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-05-09">29th</time>. Up and with my father towards my house, and by the way met with <abbr>Lieut.</abbr> Lambert, and with him to the Dolphin in Tower Street and drank our morning draught, he being much troubled about his being offered a fourth rate ship to be Lieutenant of her now he has been two years Lieutenant in a first rate. So to the office, where it is determined that I should go tomorrow to Portsmouth. So I went out of the office to Whitehall presently, and there spoke with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn and Sir George Carteret and had their advice as to my going, and so back again home, where I directed <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hater what to do in order to our going tomorrow, and so back again by coach to Whitehall and there eat something in the buttery at my Lord’s with John Goods and Ned Osgood. And so home again, and gave order to my workmen what to do in my absence. At night to Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten’s, and by his and Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn’s persuasion I sent for my wife from my father’s, who came to us to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Turner’s, where we were all at a collacion tonight till twelve o’clock, there being a gentlewoman there that did play well and sang well to the Harpsicon, and very merry we were. So home and to bed, where my wife had not lain a great while.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1661-5-10" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-05-10">30th</time>. This morning, after order given to my workmen, my wife and I and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed took coach, and in Fishstreet took up <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hater and his wife, who through her mask seemed at first to be an old woman, but afterwards I found her to be a very pretty modest black woman. We got a small bait at Leatherhead, and so to Godlyman,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1049" id="noteref-1049" epub:type="noteref">1049</a> where we lay all night, and were very merry, having this day no other extraordinary rencontre, but my hat falling off my head at Newington into the water, by which it was spoiled, and I ashamed of it. I am sorry that I am not at London, to be at Hyde Park tomorrow, among the great gallants and ladies, which will be very fine.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1050" id="noteref-1050" epub:type="noteref">1050</a></p>
			</article>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
