<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>October 1663</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-46" epub:type="chapter z3998:diary">
			<h2 epub:type="title">October 1663</h2>
			<article id="entry-1663-10-11" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-10-11">October 1st</time>. Up and betimes to my office, and then to sit, where Sir <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Carteret, Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten, Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen, Sir <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Minnes, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry and myself, a fuller board than by the King’s progresse and the late pays and my absence has been a great while. Sat late, and then home to dinner. After dinner I by water to Deptford about a little business, and so back again, buying a couple of good eeles by the way, and after writing by the post, home to see the painter at work, late, in my wife’s closet, and so to supper and to bed, having been very merry with the painter, late, while he was doing his work. This day the King and Court returned from their progress.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-10-12" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-10-12">2nd</time>. Up betimes and by water to <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s, and there visited <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry as a compliment after his new coming to town, but had no great talk with him, he being full of business. So back by foot through London, doing several errands, and at the ’Change met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cutler, and he and I to a coffeehouse, and there discoursed, and he do assure me that there is great likelyhood of a war with Holland, but I hope we shall be in good condition before it comes to break out. I like his company, and will make much of his acquaintance. So home to dinner with my wife, who is over head and eares in getting her house up, and so to the office, and with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lewes, late, upon some of the old victuallers’ accounts, and so home to supper and to bed, up to our red chamber, where we purpose always to lie. This day I received a letter from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Barlow, with a Terella,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1942" id="noteref-1942" epub:type="noteref">1942</a> which I had hoped he had sent me, but to my trouble I find it is to present from him to my Lord Sandwich, but I will make a little use of it first, and then give it him.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-10-13" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-10-13">3rd</time>. Up, being well pleased with my new lodging and the convenience of having our mayds and none else about us, Will lying below. So to the office, and there we sat full of business all the morning. At noon I home to dinner, and then abroad to buy a bell to hang by our chamber door to call the mayds. Then to the office, and met <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blackburne, who came to know the reason of his kinsman (my Will) his being observed by his friends of late to droop much. I told him my great displeasure against him and the reasons of it, to his great trouble yet satisfaction, for my care over him, and how everything I said was for the good of the fellow, and he will take time to examine the fellow about all, and to desire my pleasure concerning him, which I told him was either that he should became a better servant or that we would not have him under my roof to be a trouble. He tells me in a few days he will come to me again and we shall agree what to do therein. I home and told my wife all, and am troubled to see that my servants and others should be the greatest trouble I have in the world, more than for myself. We then to set up our bell with a smith very well, and then I late at the office. So home to supper and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-10-14" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-10-14">4th (Lord’s day)</time>. Up and to church, my house being miserably overflooded with rayne last night, which makes me almost mad. At home to dinner with my wife, and so to talk, and to church again, and so home, and all the evening most pleasantly passed the time in good discourse of our fortune and family till supper, and so to bed, in some pain below, through cold got.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-10-15" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-10-15">5th</time>. Up with pain, and with Sir <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Minnes by coach to the Temple, and then I to my brother’s, and up and down on business, and so to the New Exchange, and there met Creed, and he and I walked two or three hours, talking of many businesses, especially about Tangier, and my Lord Tiviot’s bringing in of high accounts, and yet if they were higher are like to pass without exception, and then of my Lord Sandwich sending a messenger to know whether the King intends to come to Newmarket, as is talked, that he may be ready to entertain him at Hinchingbroke. Thence home and dined, and my wife all day putting up her hangings in her closett, which she do very prettily herself with her own hand, to my great content. So I to the office till night, about several businesses, and then went and sat an hour or two with Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen, talking very largely of Sir <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Minnes’s simplicity and unsteadiness, and of Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten’s suspicious dealings, wherein I was open, and he sufficiently, so that I do not care for his telling of tales, for he said as much, but whether that were so or no I said nothing but what is my certain knowledge and belief concerning him. Thence home to bed in great pain.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-10-16" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-10-16">6th</time>. Slept pretty well, and my wife waked to ring the bell to call up our mayds to the washing about 4 o’clock, and I was and she angry that our bell did not wake them sooner, but I will get a bigger bell. So we to sleep again till 8 o’clock, and then I up in some ease to the office, where we had a full board, where we examined Cocke’s second account, when <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turner had drawn a bill directly to be paid the balance thereof, as <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cocke demanded, and Sir <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Minnes did boldly assert the truth of it, and that he had examined it, when there is no such thing, but many vouchers, upon examination, missing, and we saw reason to strike off several of his demands, and to bring down his 5 percent commission to 3 percent. So we shall save the King some money, which both the Comptroller and his clerke had absolutely given away. There was also two occasions more of difference at the table; the one being to make out a bill to Captain Smith for his salary abroad as commander-in-chief in the Streights. Sir <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Minnes did demand an increase of salary for his being Vice-Admiral in the Downes, he having received but 40<abbr>s.</abbr> without an increase, when Sir <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Lawson, in the same voyage, had £3, and others have also had increase, only he, because he was an officer of the board, was worse used than anybody else, and particularly told Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten that he was the opposer formerly of his having an increase, which I did wonder to hear him so boldly lay it to him. So we hushed up the dispute, and offered, if he would, to examine precedents, and report them, if there was anything to his advantage to be found, to the Duke. The next was, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">Chr.</abbr> Pett and Deane were summoned to give an account of some knees<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1943" id="noteref-1943" epub:type="noteref">1943</a> which Pett reported bad, that were to be served in by Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Warren, we having contracted that none should be served but such as were to be approved of by our officers. So that if they were bad they were to be blamed for receiving them. Thence we fell to talk of Warren’s other goods, which Pett had said were generally bad, and falling to this contract again, I did say it was the most cautious and as good a contract as had been made here, and the only [one] that had been in such terms. Sir <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Minnes told me angrily that Winter’s timber, bought for 33<abbr>s.</abbr> per load, was as good and in the same terms. I told him that it was not so, but that he and Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten were both abused, and I would prove it was as dear a bargain as had been made this half year, which occasioned high words between them and me, but I am able to prove it and will. That also was so ended, and so to other business. At noon Lewellin coming to me I took him and Deane, and there met my uncle Thomas, and we dined together, but was vexed that, it being washing-day, we had no meat dressed, but sent to the Cook’s, and my people had so little witt to send in our meat from abroad in that Cook’s dishes, which were marked with the name of the Cook upon them, by which, if they observed anything, they might know it was not my own dinner. After dinner we broke up, and I by coach, setting down Luellin in Cheapside. So to White Hall, where at the Committee of Tangier, but, Lord! how I was troubled to see my Lord Tiviott’s accounts of £10,000 paid in that manner, and wish 1,000 times I had not been there. Thence rose with Sir <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Carteret and to his lodgings, and there discoursed of our frays at the table today, and particularly of that of the contract, and the contract of masts the other day, declaring my fair dealing, and so needing not any man’s good report of it, or word for it, and that I would make it so appear to him, if he desired it, which he did, and I will do it. Thence home by water in great pain, and at my office a while, and thence a little to Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen, and so home to bed, and finding myself beginning to be troubled with wind as I used to be, and in pain in making water, I took a couple of pills that I had by me of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hollyard’s.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-10-17" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-10-17">7th</time>. They wrought in the morning, and I did keep my bed, and my pain continued on me mightily that I kept within all day in great pain, and could break no wind nor have any stool after my physic had done working. So in the evening I took coach and to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Holliard’s, but he was not at home, and so home again, and whether the coach did me good or no I know not. … So to bed and lay in good ease all night, and … pretty well to the morning. …<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1944" id="noteref-1944" epub:type="noteref">1944</a></p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-10-18" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-10-18">8th</time>. So, keeping myself warm, to the office, and at noon home to dinner, my pain coming again by breaking no wind nor having any stool. So to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Holliard, and by his direction, he assuring me that it is nothing of the stone, but only my constitution being costive, and that, and cold from without, breeding and keeping the wind, I took some powder that he did give me in white wine, and sat late up, till past eleven at night, with my wife in my chamber till it had done working, which was so weakly that I could hardly tell whether it did work or no. My mayds being at this time in great dirt towards getting of all my house clean, and weary and having a great deal of work to do therein tomorrow and next day, were gone to bed before my wife and I, who also do lie in our room more like beasts than Christians, but that is only in order to having of the house shortly in a cleaner, or rather very clean condition. Some ease I had so long as this did keep my body loose, and I slept well.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-10-19" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-10-19">9th</time>. And did keep my bed most of this morning, my body I find being still bound and little wind, and so my pain returned again, though not so bad, but keeping my body with warm clothes very hot I made shift to endure it, and at noon sent word to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hollyard of my condition, that I could neither have a natural stool nor break wind, and by that means still in pain and frequent offering to make water. So he sent me two bottles of drink and some syrup, one bottle to take now and the other tomorrow morning. So in the evening, after Commissioner Pett, who came to visit me, and was going to Chatham, but methinks do talk to me in quite another manner, doubtfully and shyly, and like a stranger, to what he did heretofore. After I saw he was gone I did drink one of them, but it was a most loathsome draught, and did keep myself warm after it, and had that afternoon still a stool or two, but in no plenty, nor any wind almost carried away, and so to bed. In no great pain, but do not think myself likely to be well till I have a freedom of stool and wind. Most of this day and afternoon my wife and I did spend together in setting things now up and in order in her closet, which indeed is, and will be, when I can get her some more things to put in it, a very pleasant place, and is at present very pretty, and such as she, I hope, will find great content in. So to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-10-20" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-10-20">10th</time>. Up, and not in any good ease yet, but had pain in making water, and some course. I see I must take besides keeping myself warm to make myself break wind and go freely to stool before I can be well, neither of which I can do yet, though I have drank the other bottle of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hollyard’s against my stomach this morning. I did, however, make shift to go to the office, where we sat, and there Sir <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Minnes and Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten did advise me to take some juniper water, and Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten sent to his Lady for some for me, strong water made of juniper. Whether that or anything else of my draught this morning did it I cannot tell, but I had a couple of stools forced after it … but whether I shall grow better upon it I cannot tell. Dined at home at noon, my wife and house in the dirtiest pickle that ever she and it was in almost, but in order, I hope, this night to be very clean. To the office all the afternoon upon victualling business, and late at it, so after I wrote by the post to my father, I home. This evening <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hollyard sends me an electuary to take (a walnut quantity of it) going to bed, which I did. ’Tis true I slept well, and rose in a little ease in the morning.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-10-21" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-10-21">11th (Lord’s day)</time>. And was mightily pleased to see my house clean and in good condition, but something coming into my wife’s head, and mine, to be done more about bringing the green bed into our chamber, which is handsomer than the red one, though not of the colour of our hangings, my wife forebore to make herself clean today, but continued in a sluttish condition till tomorrow. I after the old passe, all the day within doors, … the effect of my electuary last night, and the greatest of my pain I find to come by my straining. … For all this I eat with a very good stomach, and as much as I use to do, and so I did this noon, and stayed at home discoursing and doing things in my chamber, altering chairs in my chamber, and set them above in the red room, they being Turkey work, and so put their green covers upon those that were above, not so handsome. At night fell to reading in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Church History</i> of Fuller’s, and particularly Cranmer’s letter to Queen Elizabeth,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1945" id="noteref-1945" epub:type="noteref">1945</a> which pleases me mightily for his zeal, obedience, and boldness in a cause of religion. After supper to bed as I use to be, in pain.. …</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-10-22" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-10-22">12th</time>. Up (though slept well) and made some water in the morning [as] I used to do, and a little pain returned to me, and some fears, but being forced to go to the Duke at <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s, I took coach and in my way called upon <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hollyard and had his advice to take a glyster. At <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s we attended the Duke all of us. And there, after my discourse, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry of his own accord begun to tell the Duke how he found that discourse abroad did run to his prejudice about the fees that he took, and how he sold places and other things; wherein he desired to appeal to his Highness, whether he did anything more than what his predecessors did, and appealed to us all. So Sir <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Carteret did answer that some fees were heretofore taken, but what he knows not; only that selling of places never was nor ought to be countenanced. So <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry very hotly answered to Sir <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Carteret, and appealed to himself whether he was not one of the first that put him upon looking after this taking of fees, and that he told him that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Smith<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1946" id="noteref-1946" epub:type="noteref">1946</a> should say that he made £5,000 the first year, and he believed he made £7,000. This Sir <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Carteret denied, and said, that if he did say so he told a lie, for he could not, nor did know, that ever he did make that profit of his place; but that he believes he might say £2,500 the first year. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry instanced in another thing, particularly wherein Sir <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Carteret did advise with him about the selling of the Auditor’s place of the stores, when in the beginning there was an intention of creating such an office. This he confessed, but with some lessening of the tale <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry told, it being only for a respect to my Lord FitzHarding.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1947" id="noteref-1947" epub:type="noteref">1947</a> In fine, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry did put into the Duke’s hand a list of above 250 places that he did give without receiving one farthing, so much as his ordinary fees for them, upon his life and oath; and that since the Duke’s establishment of fees he had never received one token more of any man; and that in his whole life he never conditioned or discoursed of any consideration from any commanders since he came to the Navy. And afterwards, my Lord Barkeley merrily discoursing that he wished his profit greater than it was, and that he did believe that he had got £50,000 since he came in, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry did openly declare that his Lordship, or any of us, should have not only all he had got, but all that he had in the world (and yet he did not come a beggar into the Navy, nor would yet be thought to speak in any contempt of his Royall Highness’s bounty), and should have a year to consider of it too, for £25,000. The Duke’s answer was, that he wished we all had made more profit than he had of our places, and that we had all of us got as much as one man below stayres in the Court, which he presently named, and it was Sir George Lane.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1948" id="noteref-1948" epub:type="noteref">1948</a> This being ended, and the list left in the Duke’s hand, we parted, and I with Sir <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Carteret, Sir <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Minnes, and Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten by coach to the Exchange, and there a while, and so home, and whether it be the jogging, or by having my mind more employed (which I believe is a great matter) I know not, but. … I begin to be suddenly well, at least better than I was. So home and to dinner, and thence by coach to the Old Exchange, and there cheapened some laces for my wife, and then to <abbr>Mr.</abbr>⁠⸻, the great laceman in Cheapside, and bought one cost me £4, more by 20<abbr>s.</abbr> than I intended, but when I came to see them I was resolved to buy one worth wearing with credit, and so to the New Exchange, and there put it to making, and so to my Lord’s lodgings and left my wife, and so I to the Committee of Tangier, and then late home with my wife again by coach, beginning to be very well, and yet when I came home … the little straining which I thought was no strain at all at the present did by and by bring me some pain for a good while. Anon, about 8 o’clock, my wife did give me a clyster which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hollyard directed, <abbr>viz.</abbr>, a pint of strong ale, 4 <abbr>oz.</abbr> of sugar, and 2 <abbr>oz.</abbr> of butter. It lay while I lay upon the bed above an hour, if not two, and then thinking it quite lost I rose, and by and by it began with my walking to work, and gave me three or four most excellent stools and carried away wind, put me in excellent ease, and taking my usual walnut quantity of electuary at my going into bed I had about two stools in the night. …</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-10-23" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-10-23">13th</time>. And so rose in the morning in perfect good ease … continued all the morning well, and in the afternoon had a natural easily and dry stoole, the first I have had these five days or six, for which God be praised, and so am likely to continue well, observing for the time to come when any of this pain comes again:</p>
				<ol>
					<li>
						<p>To begin to keep myself as warm as I can.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Strain as little as ever I can backwards, remembering that my pain will come by and by, though in the very straining I do not feel it.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Either by physic forward or by clyster backward or both ways to get an easy and plentiful going to stool and breaking of wind.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>To begin to suspect my health immediately when I begin to become costive and bound, and by all means to keep my body loose, and that to obtain presently after I find myself going the contrary.</p>
					</li>
				</ol>
				<p>This morning at the office, and at noon with Creed to the Exchange, where much business, but, Lord! how my heart, though I know not reason for it, began to doubt myself, after I saw Stint, Field’s one-eyed solicitor, though I know not anything that they are doing, or that they endeavour anything further against us in the business till the terme. Home, and Creed with me to dinner, and after dinner John Cole, my old friend, came to see and speak with me about a friend. I find him ingenious, but more and more discern his city pedantry; but however, I will endeavour to have his company now and then, for that he knows much of the temper of the City, and is able to acquaint therein as much as most young men, being of large acquaintance, and himself, I think, somewhat unsatisfied with the present state of things at Court and in the Church. Then to the office, and there busy till late, and so home to my wife, with some ease and pleasure that I hope to be able to follow my business again, which by God’s leave I am resolved to return to with more and more eagerness. I find at Court, that either the King is doubtfull of some disturbance, or else would seem so (and I have reason to hope it is no worse), by his commanding all commanders of castles, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, to repair to their charges; and mustering the Guards the other day himself, where he found reason to dislike their condition to my Lord Gerard, finding so many absent men, or dead pays.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1949" id="noteref-1949" epub:type="noteref">1949</a> My Lady Castlemaine, I hear, is in as great favour as ever, and the King supped with her the very first night he came from Bath: and last night and the night before supped with her; when there being a chine of beef to roast, and the tide rising into their kitchen that it could not be roasted there, and the cook telling her of it, she answered, “Zounds! she must set the house on fire but it should be roasted!” So it was carried to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Sarah’s husband’s,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1950" id="noteref-1950" epub:type="noteref">1950</a> and there it was roasted. So home to supper and to bed, being mightily pleased with all my house and my red chamber, where my wife and I intend constantly to lie, and the having of our dressing room and mayds close by us without any interfering or trouble.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-10-24" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-10-24">14th</time>. Up and to my office, where all the morning, and part of it Sir <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Minnes spent, as he do everything else, like a fool, reading the Anatomy of the body to me, but so sillily as to the making of me understand anything that I was weary of him, and so I toward the ’Change and met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Grant, and he and I to the Coffeehouse, where I understand by him that Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Petty and his vessel are coming, and the King intends to go to Portsmouth to meet it. Thence home and after dinner my wife and I, by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rawlinson’s conduct, to the Jewish Synagogue: where the men and boys in their vayles, and the women behind a lattice out of sight; and some things stand up, which I believe is their Law, in a press to which all coming in do bow; and at the putting on their vayles do say something, to which others that hear him do cry Amen, and the party do kiss his vayle. Their service all in a singing way, and in Hebrew. And anon their Laws that they take out of the press are carried by several men, four or five several burdens in all, and they do relieve one another; and whether it is that everyone desires to have the carrying of it, I cannot tell, thus they carried it round about the room while such a service is singing. And in the end they had a prayer for the King, which they pronounced his name in Portugall; but the prayer, like the rest, in Hebrew. But, Lord! to see the disorder, laughing, sporting, and no attention, but confusion in all their service, more like brutes than people knowing the true God, would make a man forswear ever seeing them more and indeed I never did see so much, or could have imagined there had been any religion in the whole world so absurdly performed as this. Away thence with my mind strongly disturbed with them, by coach and set down my wife in Westminster Hall, and I to White Hall, and there the Tangier Committee met, but the Duke and the Africa Committee meeting in our room, Sir <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Carteret; Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Compton, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry, Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Rider, Cuttance and myself met in another room, with chairs set in form but no table, and there we had very fine discourses of the business of the fitness to keep Sally, and also of the terms of our King’s paying the Portugees that deserted their house at Tangier, which did much please me, and so to fetch my wife, and so to the New Exchange about her things, and called at Thomas Pepys the turner’s and bought something there, and so home to supper and to bed, after I had been a good while with Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen, railing and speaking freely our minds against Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten and Sir <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Minnes, but no more than the folly of one and the knavery of the other do deserve.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-10-25" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-10-25">15th</time>. Up, I bless God being now in pretty good condition, but cannot come to make natural stools yet.. … So up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and at noon dined at home, my head full of business, and after stepping abroad to buy a thing or two, compasses and snuffers for my wife, I returned to my office and there mighty busy till it was late, and so home well contented with the business that I had done this afternoon, and so to supper and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-10-26" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-10-26">16th</time>. Up and to my office, where all the morning doing business, and at noon home to dinner, and then up to remove my chest and clothes up stairs to my new wardrobe, that I may have all my things above where I lie, and so by coach abroad with my wife, leaving her at my Lord’s till I went to the Tangier Committee, where very good discourse concerning the Articles of peace to be continued with Guyland, and thence took up my wife, and with her to her tailor’s, and then to the Exchange and to several places, and so home and to my office, where doing some business, and then home to supper and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-10-27" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-10-27">17th</time>. Up and to my office, and there we sat a very full board all the morning upon some accounts of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gauden’s. Here happened something concerning my Will which Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten would fain charge upon him, and I heard him mutter something against him of complaint for his often receiving people’s money to Sir <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Carteret, which displeased me much, but I will be even with him. Thence to the Dolphin Tavern, and there <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gauden did give us a great dinner. Here we had some discourse of the Queen’s being very sick, if not dead, the Duke and Duchess of York being sent for betimes this morning to come to White Hall to her.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1951" id="noteref-1951" epub:type="noteref">1951</a> So to my office and there late doing business, and so home to supper, my house being got mighty clean to my great content from top to toe, and so to bed, myself beginning to be in good condition of health also, but only my laying out so much money upon clothes for myself and wife and her closet troubles me.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-10-28" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-10-28">18th (Lord’s day)</time>. Up, and troubled at a distaste my wife took at a small thing that Jane did, and to see that she should be so vexed that I took part with Jane, wherein I had reason; but by and by well again, and so my wife in her best gown and new poynt that I bought her the other day, to church with me, where she has not been these many weeks, and her mayde Jane with her. I was troubled to see Pembleton there, but I thought it prudence to take notice myself first of it and show my wife him, and so by little and little considering that it mattered not much his being there I grew less concerned and so mattered it not much, and the less when, anon, my wife showed me his wife, a pretty little woman, and well dressed, with a good jewel at her breast. The parson, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mills, I perceive, did not know whether to pray for the Queen or no, and so said nothing about her; which makes me fear she is dead. But enquiring of Sir <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Minnes, he told me that he heard she was better last night. So home to dinner, and Tom came and dined with me, and so, anon, to church again, and there a simple coxcomb preached worse than the Scot, and no Pembleton nor his wife there, which pleased me not a little, and then home and spent most of the evening at Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen’s in complaisance, seeing him though he deserves no respect from me. This evening came my uncle Wight to speak with me about my uncle Thomas’s business, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore came, 4 or 5 days out of the country and not come to see me before, though I desired by two or three messengers that he would come to me as soon as he came to town. Which do trouble me to think he should so soon forget my kindness to him, which I am afraid he do. After walking a good while in the garden with these, I went up again to Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen, and took my wife home, and after supper to prayers, and read very seriously my vowes, which I am fearful of forgetting by my late great expenses, but I hope in God I do not, and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-10-29" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-10-29">19th</time>. Waked with a very high wind, and said to my wife, “I pray God I hear not of the death of any great person, this wind is so high!” fearing that the Queen might be dead. So up; and going by coach with Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten and Sir <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Minnes to <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s, they tell me that Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Compton, who it is true had been a little sickly for a week or fortnight, but was very well upon Friday at night last at the Tangier Committee with us, was dead⁠—died yesterday: at which I was most exceedingly surprised, he being, and so all the world saying that he was, one of the worthyest men and best officers of State now in England; and so in my conscience he was: of the best temper, valour, abilities of mind, integrity, birth, fine person, and diligence of any one man he hath left behind him in the three kingdoms; and yet not forty years old, or if so, that is all.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1952" id="noteref-1952" epub:type="noteref">1952</a> I find the sober men of the Court troubled for him; and yet not so as to hinder or lessen their mirth, talking, laughing, and eating, drinking, and doing everything else, just as if there was no such thing, which is as good an instance for me hereafter to judge of death, both as to the unavoidableness, suddenness, and little effect of it upon the spirits of others, let a man be never so high, or rich, or good; but that all die alike, no more matter being made of the death of one than another, and that even to die well, the praise of it is not considerable in the world, compared to the many in the world that know not nor make anything of it, nor perhaps to them (unless to one that like this poor gentleman, who is one of a thousand, there nobody speaking ill of him) that will speak ill of a man. Coming to <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s, I hear that the Queen did sleep five hours pretty well tonight, and that she waked and gargled her mouth, and to sleep again; but that her pulse beats fast, beating twenty to the King’s or my Lady Suffolk’s eleven; but not so strong as it was. It seems she was so ill as to be shaved and pidgeons put to her feet, and to have the extreme unction given her by the priests, who were so long about it that the doctors were angry.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1953" id="noteref-1953" epub:type="noteref">1953</a> The King, they all say; is most fondly disconsolate for her, and weeps by her, which makes her weep;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1954" id="noteref-1954" epub:type="noteref">1954</a> which one this day told me he reckons a good sign, for that it carries away some rheume from the head. This morning Captain Allen tells me how the famous Ned Mullins, by a slight fall, broke his leg at the ancle, which festered; and he had his leg cut off on Saturday, but so ill done, notwithstanding all the great chyrurgeons about the town at the doing of it, that they fear he will not live with it, which is very strange, besides the torment he was put to with it. After being a little with the Duke, and being invited to dinner to my Lord Barkeley’s, and so, not knowing how to spend our time till noon, Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten and I took coach, and to the Coffeehouse in Cornhill;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1955" id="noteref-1955" epub:type="noteref">1955</a> where much talk about the Turk’s proceedings, and that the plague is got to Amsterdam, brought by a ship from Argier; and it is also carried to Hambrough. The Duke says the King purposes to forbid any of their ships coming into the river. The Duke also told us of several Christian commanders (French) gone over to the Turks to serve them; and upon inquiry I find that the King of France do by this aspire to the Empire, and so to get the Crown of Spayne also upon the death of the King, which is very probable, it seems. Back to <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s, and there dined with my Lord Barkeley and his lady, where Sir <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Carteret, Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten, and myself, with two gentlemen more; my Lady, and one of the ladies of honour to the Duchesse (no handsome woman, but a most excellent hand). A fine French dinner, and so we after dinner broke up and to Creed’s new lodgings in Axe-yard, which I like very well and so with him to White Hall and walked up and down in the galleries with good discourse, and anon <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry and Povy, sad for the loss of one of our number we sat down as a Committee for Tangier and did some business and so broke up, and I down with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry and in his chamber discoursing of business of the office and Sir <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Minnes and Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten’s carriage, when he most ingeniously tells me how they have carried themselves to him in forbearing to speak the other day to the Duke what they know they have so largely at other times said to him, and I told him what I am put to about the bargain for masts. I perceive he thinks of it all and will remember it. Thence took up my wife at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Harper’s where she and Jane were, and so called at the New Exchange for some things for her, and then at Tom’s went up and saw his house now it is finished, and indeed it is very handsome, but he not within and so home and to my office; and then to supper and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-10-30" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-10-30">20th</time>. Up and to the office, where we sat; and at noon Sir <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Carteret, Sir <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Minnes, and I to dinner to my Lord Mayor’s, being invited, where was the Farmers of the Customes, my Lord Chancellor’s three sons, and other great and much company, and a very great noble dinner, as this Mayor<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1956" id="noteref-1956" epub:type="noteref">1956</a> is good for nothing else. No extraordinary discourse of anything, every man being intent upon his dinner, and myself willing to have drunk some wine to have warmed my belly, but I did for my oath’s sake willingly refrain it, but am so well pleased and satisfied afterwards thereby, for it do keep me always in so good a frame of mind that I hope I shall not ever leave this practice. Thence home, and took my wife by coach to White Hall, and she set down at my Lord’s lodgings, I to a Committee of Tangier, and thence with her homeward, calling at several places by the way. Among others at Paul’s Churchyard, and while I was in Kirton’s shop, a fellow came to offer kindness or force to my wife in the coach, but she refusing, he went away, after the coachman had struck him, and he the coachman. So I being called, went thither, and the fellow coming out again of a shop, I did give him a good cuff or two on the chops, and seeing him not oppose me, I did give him another; at last found him drunk, of which I was glad, and so left him, and home, and so to my office awhile, and so home to supper and to bed. This evening, at my Lord’s lodgings, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Sarah talking with my wife and I how the Queen do, and how the King tends her being so ill. She tells us that the Queen’s sickness is the spotted fever; that she was as full of the spots as a leopard which is very strange that it should be no more known; but perhaps it is not so. And that the King do seem to take it much to heart, for that he hath wept before her;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1957" id="noteref-1957" epub:type="noteref">1957</a> but, for all that; that he hath not missed one night since she was sick, of supping with my Lady Castlemaine; which I believe is true, for she [Sarah] says that her husband hath dressed the suppers every night; and I confess I saw him myself coming through the street dressing of a great supper tonight, which Sarah says is also for the King and her; which is a very strange thing.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-10-31" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-10-31">21st</time>. Up, and by and by comes my brother Tom to me, though late (which do vex me to the blood that I could never get him to come time enough to me, though I have spoke a hundred times; but he is very sluggish, and too negligent ever to do well at his trade I doubt), and having lately considered with my wife very much of the inconvenience of my going in no better plight, we did resolve of putting me into a better garb, and, among other things, to have a good velvet cloake; that is, of cloth lined with velvet and other things modish, and a perruque, and so I sent him and her out to buy me velvet, and I to the Exchange, and so to Trinity House, and there dined with Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten, having some business to speak with him, and Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Rider. Thence, having my belly full, away on foot to my brother’s, all along Thames Streete, and my belly being full of small beer, I did all alone, for health’s sake, drink half a pint of Rhenish wine at the Still-yard, mixed with beer. From my brother’s with my wife to the Exchange, to buy things for her and myself, I being in a humour of laying out money, but not prodigally, but only in clothes, which I every day see that I suffer for want of, I so home, and after a little at my office, home to supper and to bed. Memorandum: This morning one <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Commander, a scrivener, came to me from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore with a deed of which. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore had told me, that my Lord had made use of my name, and that I was desired by my Lord to sign it. Remembering this very well, though understanding little of the particulars, I read it over, and found it concern Sir <abbr class="name">Robt.</abbr> Bernard and Duckinford, their interest in the manor of Brampton. So I did sign it, declaring to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Commander that I am only concerned in having my name at my Lord Sandwich’s desire used therein, and so I sealed it up after I had signed and sealed the deed, and desired him to give it so sealed to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore. I did also call at the Wardrobe this afternoon to have told <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore of it, but he was not within, but knowing <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Commander to have the esteem of a good and honest man with my Lord Crew, I did not doubt to entrust him with the deed after I had signed it. This evening after I came home I begun to enter my wife in arithmetique, in order to her studying of the globes, and she takes it very well, and, I hope, with great pleasure, I shall bring her to understand many fine things.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-11-1" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-11-01">22nd</time>. Up to the office, where we sat till noon and then I home to dinner, and after dinner with my wife to her study and there read some more arithmetique, which she takes with great ease and pleasure. This morning, hearing that the Queen grows worse again, I sent to stop the making of my velvet cloake, till I see whether she lives or dies. So a little abroad about several businesses, and then home and to my office till night, and then home to supper, teach my wife, and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-11-2" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-11-02">23rd</time>. Up, and this morning comes <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Clerke, and tells me that the Injunction against Trice is dismissed again, which troubles me much. So I am to look after it in the afternoon. There comes also by appointment my uncle Thomas, to receive the first payment of his daughter’s money. But showing of me the original of the deed by which his daughter gives her right to her legacy to him, and the copy of it attested by the Scrivener, for me to keep by me, I did find some difference, and thereupon did look more into it, and at last did find the whole thing a forgery; yet he maintained it again and again, upon oath, that it had been signed and sealed by my cousin Mary ever since before her marriage. So I told him to his teeth he did like a knave, and so he did, and went with him to the Scrivener at Bedlam, and there found how it came to pass, <abbr>viz.</abbr>, that he had lost, or pretends to have lost, the true original, and that so he was forced to take this course; but a knave, at least a man that values not what he swears to, I perceive he is. But however I am now better able to see myself fully secured before I part with the money, for I find that his son Charles has right to this legacy till the first £100 of his daughter’s portion be paid, he being bond for it. So I put him upon getting both his sons to be bound for my security, and so left him and so home, and then abroad to my brother’s, but found him abroad at the young couple that was married yesterday, and he one of the Br[ide’s] men, a kinswoman (Brumfield)<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1958" id="noteref-1958" epub:type="noteref">1958</a> of the Joyces married to an upholster. Thence walked to the King’s Head at Charing Cross and there dined, and hear that the Queen slept pretty well last night, but her fever continues upon her still. It seems she hath never a Portuguese doctor here. Thence by appointment to the Six Clerks’ office to meet <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Clerke, which I did and there waited all the afternoon for Wilkinson my attorney, but he came not, and so vexed and weary we parted, and I endeavoured but in vain to have found <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Williams, of whom I shall have use in Trice’s business, but I could not find him. So weary walked home; in my way bought a large kitchen knife and half dozen oyster knives. Thence to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Holliard, who tells me that Mullins is dead of his leg cut off the other day, but most basely done. He tells me that there is no doubt but that all my slyme do come away in my water, and therefore no fear of the stone; but that my water being so slymy is a good sign. He would have me now and then to take a clyster, the same I did the other day, though I feel no pain, only to keep me loose, and instead of butter, which he would have to be salt butter, he would have me sometimes use two or three ounces of honey, at other times two or three ounces of Linseed oil. Thence to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rawlinson’s and saw some of my new bottles made, with my crest upon them, filled with wine, about five or six dozen. So home and to my office a little, and thence home to prepare myself against <abbr class="name">T.</abbr> Trice, and also to draw a bond fit for my uncle and his sons to enter into before I pay them the money. That done to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-11-3" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-11-03">24th</time>. Up and to my office, where busy all the morning about <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gauden’s account, and at noon to dinner with him at the Dolphin, where mighty merry by pleasant stories of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry’s and Sir <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Minnes’s, which I have put down some of in my book of tales. Just as I was going out my uncle Thomas came to the with a draught of a bond for him and his sons to sign to me about the payment of the £20 legacy, which I agreed to, but he would fain have had from me the copy of the deed, which he had forged and did bring me yesterday, but I would not give him it. Says [he] I perceive then you will keep it to defame me with, and desired me not to speak of it, for he did it innocently. Now I confess I do not find any great hurt in the thing, but only to keep from me a sight of the true original deed, wherein perhaps there was something else that may touch this business of the legacy which he would keep from me, or it may be, it is really lost as he says it is. But then he need not have used such a slight, but confess it without danger. Thence by coach with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry to the Temple, and thence I to the Six Clerks’ office, and discoursed with my Attorney and Solicitor, and he and I to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turner, who puts me in great fear that I shall not get retayned again against Tom Trice; which troubles me. Thence, it being night, homewards, and called at Wotton’s and tried some shoes, but he had none to fit me. He tells me that by the Duke of York’s persuasion Harris is come again to Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Davenant upon his terms that he demanded, which will make him very high and proud. Thence to another shop, and there bought me a pair of shoes, and so walked home and to my office, and dispatch letters by the post, and so home to supper and to bed, where to my trouble I find my wife begin to talk of her being alone all day, which is nothing but her lack of something to do, for while she was busy she never, or seldom, complained.. … The Queen is in a good way of recovery; and Sir Francis Pridgeon<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1959" id="noteref-1959" epub:type="noteref">1959</a> hath got great honour by it, it being all imputed to his cordiall, which in her dispaire did give her rest and brought her to some hopes of recovery. It seems that, after the much talk of troubles and a plot, something is found in the North that a party was to rise, and some persons that were to command it are found, as I find in a letter that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry read today about it from those parts.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1960" id="noteref-1960" epub:type="noteref">1960</a></p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-11-4" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-11-04">25th (Lord’s day)</time>. Up, and my wife and I to church, where it is strange to see how the use and seeing Pembleton come with his wife thither to church, I begin now to make too great matter of it, which before was so terrible to me. Dined at home, my wife and I alone, a good dinner, and so in the afternoon to church again, where the Scot preached, and I slept most of the afternoon. So home, and my wife and I together all the evening discoursing, and then after reading my vowes to myself, and my wife with her mayds (who are mighty busy to get it dispatched because of their mistress’s promise, that when it is done they shall have leave all to go see their friends at Westminster, whither my wife will carry them) preparing for their washing tomorrow, we hastened to supper and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-11-5" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-11-05">26th</time>. Waked about one o’clock in the morning. … My wife being waked rung her bell, and the mayds rose and went to washing, we to sleep again till 7 o’clock, and then up, and I abroad to look out <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Williams, but being gone out I went to Westminster, and there seeing my Lord Sandwich’s footman knew he was come to town, and so I went in and saw him, and received a kind salute from him, but hear that my father is very ill still. Thence to Westminster Hall with Creed, and spent the morning walking there, where, it being Terme time, I met several persons, and talked with them, among others <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Pierce, who tells me that the Queen is in a way to be pretty well again, but that her delirium in her head continues still; that she talks idle, not by fits, but always, which in some lasts a week after so high a fever, in some more, and in some forever; that this morning she talked mightily that she was brought to bed, and that she wondered that she should be delivered without pain and without spueing or being sicke, and that she was troubled that her boy was but an ugly boy. But the King being by, said, “No, it is a very pretty boy.”⁠—“Nay,” says she, “if it be like you it is a fine boy indeed, and I would be very well pleased with it.” The other day she talked mightily of Sir <abbr class="name">H.</abbr> Wood’s lady’s great belly, and said if she should miscarry he would never get another, and that she never saw such a man as this Sir <abbr class="name">H.</abbr> Wood in her life, and seeing of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Pridgeon, she said, “Nay, Doctor, you need not scratch your head, there is hair little enough already in the place.” But methinks it was not handsome for the weaknesses of Princes to be talked of thus. Thence Creed and I to the King’s Head ordinary, where much and very good company, among others one very talking man, but a scholler, that would needs put in his discourse and philosophy upon every occasion, and though he did well enough, yet his readiness to speak spoilt all. Here they say that the Turkes go on apace, and that my Lord Castlehaven<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1961" id="noteref-1961" epub:type="noteref">1961</a> is going to raise 10,000 men here for to go against him; that the King of France do offer to assist the Empire upon condition that he may be their Generalissimo, and the Dolphin chosen King of the Romans: and it is said that the King of France do occasion this difference among the Christian Princes of the Empire, which gives the Turke such advantages. They say also that the King of Spayne is making all imaginable force against Portugall again. Thence Creed and I to one or two periwigg shops about the Temple, having been very much displeased with one that we saw, a head of greasy and old woman’s haire, at Jervas’s in the morning; and there I think I shall fit myself of one very handsomely made. Thence by coach, my mind being troubled for not meeting with <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Williams, to <abbr>St.</abbr> Catharine’s to look at a Dutch ship or two for some good handsome maps, but met none, and so back to Cornhill to Moxon’s, but it being dark we stayed not to see any, then to coach again, and presently spying Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten; I ’light and took him in and to the Globe in Fleete Streete, by appointment, where by and by he and I with our solicitor to Sir <abbr class="name">E.</abbr> Turner about Field’s business, and back to the Globe, and thither I sent for <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Williams, and he is willing to swear in my behalf against <abbr class="name">T.</abbr> Trice, <abbr>viz.</abbr>, that at <abbr class="name">T.</abbr> Trice’s desire we have met to treat about our business. Thence (I drinking no wine) after an hour’s stay Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten and another, and he drinking, we home by coach, and so to my office and set down my Journall, and then home to supper and to bed, my washing being in a good condition over. I did give <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Williams 20<abbr>s.</abbr> tonight, but it was after he had answered me well to what I had to ask him about this business, and it was only what I had long ago in my petty bag book allotted for him besides the bill of near £4 which I paid him a good while since by my brother Tom for physique for my wife, without any consideration to this business that he is to do for me, as God shall save me. Among the rest, talking of the Emperor at table today one young gentleman, a pretty man, and it seems a Parliament man, did say that he was a sot;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1962" id="noteref-1962" epub:type="noteref">1962</a> for he minded nothing of the Government, but was led by the Jesuites. Several at table took him up, some for saying that he was a sot in being led by the Jesuites, [who] are the best counsel he can take. Another commander, a Scott[ish] Collonell, who I believe had several under him, that he was a man that had thus long kept out the Turke till now, and did many other great things, and lastly <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Progers,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1963" id="noteref-1963" epub:type="noteref">1963</a> one of our courtiers, who told him that it was not a thing to be said of any Soveraigne Prince, be his weaknesses what they will, to be called a sot, which methinks was very prettily said.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-11-6" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-11-06">27th</time>. Up, and my uncle Thomas and his scrivener bringing me a bond and affidavit to my mind, I paid him his £20 for his daughter’s legacy, and £5 more for a Quarter’s annuity, in the manner expressed in each acquittance, to which I must be referred on any future occasion, and to the bond and affidavit. Thence to the office and there sat till noon, and then home to dinner, and after dinner (it being a foul house today among my maids, making up their clothes) abroad with my Will with me by coach to Dr, Williams, and with him to the Six Clerks’s office, and there, by advice of his acquaintance, I find that my case, through my neglect and the neglect of my lawyers, is come to be very bad, so as that it will be very hard to get my bill retayned again. However, I got him to sign and swear an affidavit that there was treaties between <abbr class="name">T.</abbr> Trice and me with as much advantage as I could for me, but I will say that for him he was most exact as ever I saw man in my life, word by word what it was that he swore to, and though, God forgive me, I could have been almost naturally willing to have let him ignorantly have sworn to something that was not of itself very certain, either or no, yet out of his own conscience and care he altered the words himself so as to make them very safe for him to swear. This I carrying to my clerk Wilkinson, and telling him how I heard matters to stand, he, like a conceited fellow, made nothing of it but advised me to offer Trice’s clerks the cost of the dismission, <abbr>viz.</abbr>, 46<abbr>s.</abbr> 8<abbr>d.</abbr>, which I did, but they would not take it without his client. Immediately thereupon we parted, and met <abbr class="name">T.</abbr> Trice coming into the room, and he came to me and served me with a subpœnâ for these very costs, so I paid it him, but Lord! to see his resolution, and indeed discretion, in the wording of his receipt, he would have it most express to my greatest disadvantage that could be, yet so as I could not deny to give it him. That being paid, my clerke, and then his began to ask why we could not think, being friends, of referring it, or stating it, first ourselves, and then put it to some good lawyer to judge in it. From one word to more we were resolved to try, and to that end to step to the Pope’s Head Taverne, and there he and his Clerke and Attorney and I and my Clerke, and sent for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Smallwood, and by and by comes <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Clerke, my Solicitor, and after I had privately discoursed with my men and seen how doubtfully they talked, and what future certain charge and trouble it would be, with a doubtful victory, I resolved to condescend very low, and after some talke all together Trice and I retired, and he came to £150 the lowest, and I bid him £80. So broke off and then went to our company, and they putting us to a second private discourse, at last I was contented to give him £100, he to spend 40<abbr>s.</abbr> of it among this good company that was with us. So we went to our company, both seeming well pleased that we were come to an end, and indeed I am in the respects above said, though it be a great sum for us to part with. I am to pay him by giving him leave to buy about £40 worth of Piggott’s land and to strike off so much of Piggott’s debt, and the other to give him bond to pay him in 12 months after without interest, only giving him a power to buy more land of Piggott and paying him that way as he did for the other, which I am well enough contented with, or at least to take the land at that price and give him the money. This last I did not tell him, but I shall order it so. Having agreed upon tomorrow come se’nnight for the spending of the 40<abbr>s.</abbr> at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rawlinson’s, we parted, and I set <abbr class="name">T.</abbr> Trice down in Paul’s Churchyard and I by coach home and to my office, and there set down this day’s passages, and so home to supper and to bed. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry tells me today that the Queen had a very good night last night; but yet it is strange that still she raves and talks of little more than of her having of children, and fancys now that she hath three children, and that the girle is very like the King. And this morning about five o’clock waked (the physician feeling her pulse, thinking to be better able to judge, she being still and asleep, waked her) and the first word she said was, “How do the children?”</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-11-7" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-11-07">28th</time>. Up and at my office all the morning, and at noon <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed came to me and dined with me, and after dinner Murford came to me and he and I discoursed wholly upon his breach of contract with us. After that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed and I abroad, I doing several errands, and with him at last to the great coffeehouse, and there after some common discourse we parted and I home, paying what I owed at the Mitre in my way, and at home Sympson the joyner coming he set up my press for my cloaks and other small things, and so to my office a little, and to supper, and to bed. This morning <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blackburne came to me, and telling me what complaints Will made of the usage he had from my wife and other discouragements, and, I seeing him, instead of advising, rather favouring his kinsman, I told him freely my mind, but friendlily, and so we have concluded to have him have a lodging elsewhere, and that I will spare him £15 of his salary, and if I do not need to keep another £20.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-11-8" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-11-08">29th</time>. Up, it being my Lord Mayor’s day, Sir Anthony Bateman.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1964" id="noteref-1964" epub:type="noteref">1964</a> This morning was brought home my new velvet cloake, that is, lined with velvet, a good cloth the outside, the first that ever I had in my life, and I pray God it may not be too soon now that I begin to wear it. I had it this day brought, thinking to have worn it to dinner, but I thought it would be better to go without it because of the crowde, and so I did not wear it. We met a little at the office, and then home again and got me ready to go forth, my wife being gone forth by my consent before to see her father and mother, and taken her cooke mayde and little girle to Westminster with her for them to see their friends. This morning in dressing myself and wanting a band,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1965" id="noteref-1965" epub:type="noteref">1965</a> I found all my bands that were newly made clean so ill smoothed that I crumpled them, and flung them all on the ground, and was angry with Jane, which made the poor girle mighty sad, so that I were troubled for it afterwards. At noon I went forth, and by coach to Guild Hall (by the way calling at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rawlinson’s), and there was admitted, and meeting with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Proby (Sir <abbr class="name">R.</abbr> Ford’s son), and Lieutenant-Colonel Baron, a City commander, we went up and down to see the tables; where under every salt there was a bill of fare, and at the end of the table the persons proper for the table. Many were the tables, but none in the Hall but the Mayor’s and the Lords of the Privy Council that had napkins<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1966" id="noteref-1966" epub:type="noteref">1966</a> or knives, which was very strange. We went into the Buttry, and there stayed and talked, and then into the Hall again: and there wine was offered and they drunk, I only drinking some hypocras, which do not break my vowe, it being, to the best of my present judgement, only a mixed compound drink, and not any wine.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1967" id="noteref-1967" epub:type="noteref">1967</a> If I am mistaken, God forgive me! but I hope and do think I am not. By and by met with Creed; and we, with the others, went within the several Courts, and there saw the tables prepared for the Ladies and Judges and Bishopps: all great sign of a great dinner to come. By and by about one o’clock, before the Lord Mayor came, come into the Hall, from the room where they were first led into, the Lord Chancellor (Archbishopp before him), with the Lords of the Council, and other Bishopps, and they to dinner. Anon comes the Lord Mayor, who went up to the lords, and then to the other tables to bid wellcome; and so all to dinner. I sat near Proby, Baron, and Creed at the Merchant Strangers’ table; where ten good dishes to a messe, with plenty of wine of all sorts, of which I drunk none; but it was very unpleasing that we had no napkins nor change of trenchers, and drunk out of earthen pitchers and wooden dishes.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1968" id="noteref-1968" epub:type="noteref">1968</a> It happened that after the lords had half dined, came the French Embassador, up to the lords’ table, where he was to have sat; but finding the table set, he would not sit down nor dine with the Lord Mayor, who was not yet come, nor have a table to himself, which was offered; but in a discontent went away again.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1969" id="noteref-1969" epub:type="noteref">1969</a> After I had dined, I and Creed rose and went up and down the house, and up to the lady’s room, and there stayed gazing upon them. But though there were many and fine, both young and old, yet I could not discern one handsome face there; which was very strange, nor did I find the lady that young Dawes married so pretty as I took her for, I having here an opportunity of looking much upon her very near. I expected musique, but there was none but only trumpets and drums, which displeased me. The dinner, it seems, is made by the Mayor and two Sheriffs for the time being, the Lord Mayor paying one half, and they the other. And the whole, Proby says, is reckoned to come to about 7 or £800 at most. Being wearied with looking upon a company of ugly women, Creed and I went away, and took coach and through Cheapside, and there saw the pageants,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1970" id="noteref-1970" epub:type="noteref">1970</a> which were very silly, and thence to the Temple, where meeting Greatorex, he and we to Hercules Pillars, there to show me the manner of his going about of draining of fenns,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1971" id="noteref-1971" epub:type="noteref">1971</a> which I desired much to know, but it did not appear very satisfactory to me, as he discoursed it, and I doubt he will faile in it. Thence I by coach home, and there found my wife come home, and by and by came my brother Tom, with whom I was very angry for not sending me a bill with my things, so as that I think never to have more work done by him if ever he serves me so again, and so I told him. The consideration of laying out £32 12<abbr>s.</abbr> this very month in his very work troubles me also, and one thing more, that is to say, that Will having been at home all the day, I doubt is the occasion that Jane has spoken to her mistress tonight that she sees she cannot please us and will look out to provide herself elsewhere, which do trouble both of us, and we wonder also at her, but yet when the rogue is gone I do not fear but the wench will do well. To the office a little, to set down my Journall, and so home late to supper and to bed. The Queen mends apace, they say; but yet talks idle still.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-11-9" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-11-09">30th</time>. Lay long in bed with my wife, and then up and a while at my office, and so to the ’Change, and so [home] again, and there I found my wife in a great passion with her mayds. I upstairs to set some things in order in our chamber and wardrobe, and so to dinner upon a good dish of stewed beef, then up again about my business. Then by coach with my wife to the New Exchange, and there bought and paid for several things, and then back, calling at my periwigg-makers, and there showed my wife the periwigg made for me, and she likes it very well, and so to my brother’s, and to buy a pair of boddice for her, and so home, and to my office late, and then home to my wife, purposing to go on to a new lesson in arithmetique with her. So to supper and to bed. The Queen mends apace, but her head still light. My mind very heavy thinking of my great layings out lately, and what they must still be for clothes, but I hope it is in order to getting of something the more by it, for I perceive how I have hitherto suffered for lack of going as becomes my place. After a little discourse with my wife upon arithmetique, to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-11-10" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-11-10">31st</time>. Up and to the office, where we sat all the morning, and at noon home to dinner, where Creed came and dined with me, and after dinner he and I upstairs, and I showed him my velvet cloake and other things of clothes, that I have lately bought, which he likes very well, and I took his opinion as to some things of clothes, which I purpose to wear, being resolved to go a little handsomer than I have hitherto. Thence to the office; where busy till night, and then to prepare my monthly account, about which I stayed till 10 or 11 o’clock at night, and to my great sorrow find myself £43 worse than I was the last month, which was then £760, and now it is but £717. But it hath chiefly arisen from my layings-out in clothes for myself and wife; <abbr>viz.</abbr>, for her about £12, and for myself £55, or thereabouts; having made myself a velvet cloake, two new cloth suits, black, plain both; a new shagg<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1972" id="noteref-1972" epub:type="noteref">1972</a> gowne, trimmed with gold buttons and twist, with a new hat, and, silk tops for my legs, and many other things, being resolved henceforward to go like myself. And also two perriwiggs, one whereof costs me £3, and the other 40<abbr>s.</abbr>⁠—I have worn neither yet, but will begin next week, God willing. So that I hope I shall not need now to lay out more money a great while, I having laid out in clothes for myself and wife, and for her closett and other things without, these two months, this and the last, besides household expenses of victuals, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, above £110. But I hope I shall with more comfort labour to get more, and with better successe than when, for want of clothes, I was forced to sneake like a beggar. Having done this I went home, and after supper to bed, my mind being eased in knowing my condition, though troubled to think that I have been forced to spend so much.</p>
				<p>Thus I end this month worth £717, or thereabouts, with a good deal of good goods more than I had, and a great deal of new and good clothes. My greatest trouble and my wife’s is our family, mighty out of order by this fellow Will’s corrupting the mayds by his idle talke and carriage, which we are going to remove by hastening him out of the house, which his uncle Blackburne is upon doing, and I am to give him £20 per annum toward his maintenance. The Queene continues lightheaded, but in hopes to recover. The plague is much in Amsterdam, and we in fears of it here, which God defend.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1973" id="noteref-1973" epub:type="noteref">1973</a> The Turke goes on mightily in the Emperor’s dominions, and the Princes cannot agree among themselves how to go against him. Myself in pretty good health now, after being ill this month for a week together, but cannot yet come to … well, being so costive, but for this month almost I have not had a good natural stool, but to this hour am forced to take physic every night, which brings me neither but one stool, and that in the morning as soon as I am up, all the rest of the day very costive. My father has been very ill in the country, but I hope better again now. I am lately come to a conclusion with Tom Trice to pay him £100, which is a great deale of money, but I hope it will save a great deale more. But thus everything lessens, which I have and am like to have, and therefore I must look about me to get something more than just my salary, or else I may resolve to live well and die a beggar.</p>
			</article>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
