<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>June 1662</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-30" epub:type="chapter z3998:diary">
			<h2 epub:type="title">June 1662</h2>
			<article id="entry-1662-6-11" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-06-11">June 1st (Lord’s day)</time>. At church in the morning. A stranger made a very good sermon. Dined at home, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Spong came to see me; so he and I sat down a little to sing some French psalms, and then comes <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shepley and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore, and so we to dinner, and after dinner to church again, where a Presbyter made a sad and long sermon, which vexed me, and so home, and so to walk on the leads, and supper and to prayers and bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-6-12" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-06-12">2nd</time>. Up early about business and then to the Wardrobe with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore, and spoke to my Lord about the exchange of the crusados<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1442" id="noteref-1442" epub:type="noteref">1442</a> into sterling money, and other matters. So to my father at Tom’s, and after some talk with him away home, and by and by comes my father to dinner with me, and then by coach, setting him down in Cheapside, my wife and I to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Clarke’s at Westminster, the first visit that ever we both made her yet. We found her in a deshabille, intending to go to Hampton Court tomorrow. We had much pretty discourse, and a very fine lady she is. Thence by water to Salisbury Court, and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Turner not being at home, home by coach, and so after walking on the leads and supper to bed. This day my wife put on her slasht waistcoat, which is very pretty.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-6-13" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-06-13">3rd</time>. Up by four o’clock and to my business in my chamber, to even accounts with my Lord and myself, and very fain I would become master of £1,000, but I have not above £530 toward it yet. At the office all the morning, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry brought his patent and took his place with us this morning. Upon our making a contract, I went, as I use to do, to draw the heads thereof, but Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn most basely told me that the Comptroller is to do it, and so begun to employ <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turner about it, at which I was much vexed, and begun to dispute; and what with the letter of the Duke’s orders, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Barlow’s letter, and the practice of our predecessors, which Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Carteret knew best when he was Comptroller, it was ruled for me. What Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes will do when he comes I know not, but Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn did it like a base raskall, and so I shall remember him while I live. After office done, I went down to the Towre Wharf, where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed and Shepley was ready with three chests of the crusados, being about £6,000, ready to bring to shore to my house, which they did, and put it in my further cellar, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shepley took the key. I to my father and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Williams and Tom Trice, by appointment, in the Old Bayly, to Short’s, the alehouse, but could come to no terms with <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T.</abbr> Trice. Thence to the Wardrobe, where I found my Lady come from Hampton Court, where the Queen hath used her very civilly; and my Lady tells me is a most pretty woman, at which I am glad. Yesterday (Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Ford told me) the Aldermen of the City did attend her in their habits, and did present her with a gold Cupp and £1,000 in gold therein. But, he told me, that they are so poor in their Chamber, that they were fain to call two or three Aldermen to raise fines to make up this sum, among which was Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Warren. Home and to the office, where about 8 at night comes Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Carteret and Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten, and so we did some business, and then home and to bed, my mind troubled about Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn, his playing the rogue with me today, as also about the charge of money that is in my house, which I had forgot; but I made the maids to rise and light a candle, and set it in the dining-room, to scare away thieves, and so to sleep.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-6-14" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-06-14">4th</time>. Up early, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore comes to me and tells me that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Barnwell is dead, which troubles me something, and the more for that I believe we shall lose <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shepley’s company. By and by Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten and I by water to Woolwich; and there saw an experiment made of Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Ford’s Holland’s yarn (about which we have lately had so much stir; and I have much concerned myself for our ropemaker, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hughes, who has represented it as bad), and we found it to be very bad, and broke sooner than, upon a fair triall, five threads of that against four of Riga yarn; and also that some of it had old stuff that had been tarred, covered over with new hemp, which is such a cheat as hath not been heard of. I was glad of this discovery, because I would not have the King’s workmen discouraged (as Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten do most basely do) from representing the faults of merchants’ goods, where there is any. After eating some fish that we had bought upon the water at Falconer’s, we went to Woolwich, and there viewed our frames of our houses, and so home, and I to my Lord’s, who I find resolved to buy Brampton Manor of Sir Peter Ball,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1443" id="noteref-1443" epub:type="noteref">1443</a> at which I am glad. Thence to Whitehall, and showed Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Carteret the cheat, and so to the Wardrobe, and there stayed and supped with my Lady. My Lord eating nothing, but writes letters tonight to several places, he being to go out of town tomorrow. So late home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-6-15" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-06-15">5th</time>. To the Wardrobe, and there my Lord did enquire my opinion of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore, which I did give to the best advantage I could, and by that means shall get him joined with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Townsend in the Wardrobe business. He did also give me all <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shepley’s and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore’s accounts to view, which I am glad of, as being his great trust in me, and I would willingly keep up a good interest with him. So took leave of him (he being to go this day) and to the office, where they were just sat down, and I showed them yesterday’s discovery, and have got Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Ford to be my enemy by it; but I care not, for it is my duty, and so did get his bill stopped for the present. To dinner, and found <abbr>Dr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Thos.</abbr> Pepys at my house; but I was called from dinner by a note from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore to Alderman Backwell’s, to see some thousands of my Lord’s crusados weighed, and we find that 3,000 come to about £530 or 40 generally. Home again and found my father there; we talked a good while and so parted. We met at the office in the afternoon to finish <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gauden’s accounts, but did not do them quite. In the evening with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore to Backwell’s with another 1,200 crusados and saw them weighed, and so home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-6-16" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-06-16">6th</time>. At my office all alone all the morning, and the smith being with me about other things, did open a chest that hath stood ever since I came to the office, in my office, and there we found a modell of a fine ship, which I long to know whether it be the King’s or <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turner’s. At noon to the Wardrobe by appointment to meet my father, who did come and was well treated by my Lady, who tells me she has some thoughts to send her two little boys to our house at Brampton, but I have got leave for them to go along with me and my wife to Hampton Court tomorrow or Sunday. Thence to my brother Tom’s, where we found a letter from Pall that my mother is dangerously ill in fear of death, which troubles my father and me much, but I hope it is otherwise, the letter being four days old since it was writ. Home and at my office, and with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hater set things in order till evening, and so home and to bed by daylight. This day at my father’s desire I lent my brother Tom £20, to be repaid out of the proceeds of Sturtlow when we can sell it. I sent the money all in new money by my boy from Alderman Backwell’s.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-6-17" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-06-17">7th</time>. To the office, where all the morning, and I find <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry is resolved to do much good, and to enquire into all the miscarriages of the office. At noon with him and Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten to dinner at Trinity House; where, among others, Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Robinson, Lieutenant of the Tower, was, who says that yesterday Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Vane had a full hearing at the King’s Bench, and is found guilty; and that he did never hear any man argue more simply than he in all his life, and so others say. My mind in great trouble whether I should go as I intended to Hampton Court tomorrow or no. At last resolved the contrary, because of the charge thereof, and I am afraid now to bring in any accounts for journeys, and so will others I suppose be, because of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry’s prying into them. Thence sent for to Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Carteret’s, and there talked with him a good while. I perceive, as he told me, were it not that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry had already feathered his nest in selling of places, he do like him very well, and hopes great good from him. But he complains so of lack of money, that my heart is very sad, under the apprehension of the fall of the office. At my office all the afternoon, and at night hear that my father is gone into the country, but whether to Richmond as he intended, and thence to meet us at Hampton Court on Monday, I know not, or to Brampton. At which I am much troubled. In the evening home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-6-18" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-06-18">8th (Lord’s day)</time>. Lay till church-time in bed, and so up and to church, and there I found <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mills come home out of the country again, and preached but a lazy sermon. Home and dined with my wife, and so to church again with her. Thence walked to my Lady’s, and there supped with her, and merry, among other things, with the parrott which my Lord hath brought from the sea, which speaks very well, and cries Pall so pleasantly, that made my Lord give it my Lady Paulina; but my Lady, her mother, do not like it. Home, and observe my man Will to walk with his cloak flung over his shoulder, like a Ruffian, which, whether it was that he might not be seen to walk along with the footboy, I know not, but I was vexed at it; and coming home, and after prayers, I did ask him where he learned that immodest garb, and he answered me that it was not immodest, or some such slight answer, at which I did give him two boxes on the ears, which I never did before, and so was after a little troubled at it.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-6-19" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-06-19">9th</time>. Early up and at the office with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hater, making my alphabet of contracts, upon the dispatch of which I am now very intent, for that I am resolved much to enquire into the price of commodities. Dined at home, and after dinner to Greatorex’s, and with him and another stranger to the Tavern, but I drank no wine. He recommended Bond, of our end of the town, to teach me to measure timber, and some other things that I would learn, in order to my office. Thence back again to the office, and there <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">T.</abbr> Hater and I did make an end of my alphabet, which did much please me. So home to supper and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-6-20" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-06-20">10th</time>. At the office all the morning, much business; and great hopes of bringing things, by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry’s means, to a good condition in the office. Dined at home, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hunt with us; to the office again in the afternoon, but not meeting, as was intended, I went to my brother’s and bookseller’s, and other places about business, and paid off all for books to this day, and do not intend to buy any more of any kind a good while, though I had a great mind to have bought the King’s works, as they are new printed in folio, and present it to my Lord; but I think it will be best to save the money. So home and to bed.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1444" id="noteref-1444" epub:type="noteref">1444</a></p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-6-21" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-06-21">11th</time>. At the office all the morning, Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten, Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn, and I about the Victualler’s accounts. Then home to dinner and to the office again all the afternoon, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hater and I writing over my Alphabet fair, in which I took great pleasure to rule the lines and to have the capitall words wrote with red ink. So home and to supper. This evening Savill the Paynter came and did varnish over my wife’s picture and mine, and I paid him for my little picture £3, and so am clear with him. So after supper to bed. This day I had a letter from my father that he is got down well, and found my mother pretty well again. So that I am vexed with all my heart at Pall for writing to him so much concerning my mother’s illness (which I believe was not so great), so that he should be forced to hasten down on the sudden back into the country without taking leave, or having any pleasure here.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-6-22" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-06-22">12th</time>. This morning I tried on my riding cloth suit with close knees, the first that ever I had; and I think they will be very convenient, if not too hot to wear any other open knees after them. At the office all the morning, where we had a full Board, <abbr>viz.</abbr>, Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Carteret, Sir John Mennes, Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry, Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pett, and myself. Among many other businesses, I did get a vote signed by all, concerning my issuing of warrants, which they did not smell the use I intend to make of it; but it is to plead for my clerks to have their right of giving out all warrants, at which I am not a little pleased. But a great difference happened between Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Carteret and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry, about passing the Victualler’s account, and whether Sir George is to pay the Victualler his money, or the Exchequer; Sir George claiming it to be his place to save his threepences. It ended in anger, and I believe will come to be a question before the King and Council. I did what I could to keep myself unconcerned in it, having some things of my own to do before I would appear high in anything. Thence to dinner, by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gauden’s invitation, to the Dolphin, where a good dinner; but what is to myself a great wonder; that with ease I past the whole dinner without drinking a drop of wine. After dinner to the office, my head full of business, and so home, and it being the longest day in the year<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1445" id="noteref-1445" epub:type="noteref">1445</a> I made all my people go to bed by daylight. But after I was abed and asleep, a note came from my brother Tom to tell me that my cousin Anne Pepys, of Worcestershire, her husband is dead, and she married again, and her second husband<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1446" id="noteref-1446" epub:type="noteref">1446</a> in town, and intends to come and see me tomorrow.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-6-23" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-06-23">13th</time>. Up by 4 o’clock in the morning, and read Cicero’s Second Oration against Catiline, which pleased me exceedingly; and more I discern therein than ever I thought was to be found in him; but I perceive it was my ignorance, and that he is as good a writer as ever I read in my life. By and by to Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Carteret’s, to talk with him about yesterday’s difference at the office; and offered my service to look into any old books or papers that I have, that may make for him. He was well pleased therewith, and did much inveigh against <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry; telling me how he had done him service in the Parliament, when Prin had drawn up things against him for taking of money for places; that he did at his desire, and upon his letters, keep him off from doing it. And many other things he told me, as how the King was beholden to him, and in what a miserable condition his family would be, if he should die before he hath cleared his accounts. Upon the whole, I do find that he do much esteem of me, and is my friend, and I may make good use of him. Thence to several places about business, among others to my brother’s, and there Tom Beneere the barber trimmed me. Thence to my Lady’s, and there dined with her, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Laxton, Gibbons, and Goldgroove with us, and after dinner some music, and so home to my business, and in the evening my wife and I, and Sarah and the boy, a most pleasant walk to Halfway house, and so home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-6-24" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-06-24">14th</time>. Up by four o’clock in the morning and upon business at my office. Then we sat down to business, and about 11 o’clock, having a room got ready for us, we all went out to the Tower-hill; and there, over against the scaffold, made on purpose this day, saw Sir Henry Vane brought.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1447" id="noteref-1447" epub:type="noteref">1447</a> A very great press of people. He made a long speech, many times interrupted by the Sheriff and others there; and they would have taken his paper out of his hand, but he would not let it go. But they caused all the books of those that writ after him to be given the Sheriff; and the trumpets were brought under the scaffold that he might not be heard. Then he prayed, and so fitted himself, and received the blow; but the scaffold was so crowded that we could not see it done. But Boreman,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1448" id="noteref-1448" epub:type="noteref">1448</a> who had been upon the scaffold, came to us and told us, that first he began to speak of the irregular proceeding against him; that he was, against Magna Charta, denied to have his exceptions against the indictment allowed; and that there he was stopped by the Sheriff. Then he drew out his, paper of notes, and begun to tell them first his life; that he was born a gentleman, that he was bred up and had the quality of a gentleman, and to make him in the opinion of the world more a gentleman, he had been, till he was seventeen years old, a good fellow, but then it pleased God to lay a foundation of grace in his heart, by which he was persuaded, against his worldly interest, to leave all preferment and go abroad, where he might serve God with more freedom. Then he was called home, and made a member of the Long Parliament; where he never did, to this day, anything against his conscience, but all for the glory of God. Here he would have given them an account of the proceedings of the Long Parliament, but they so often interrupted him, that at last he was forced to give over: and so fell into prayer for England in general, then for the churches in England, and then for the City of London: and so fitted himself for the block, and received the blow. He had a blister, or issue, upon his neck, which he desired them not hurt: he changed not his colour or speech to the last, but died justifying himself and the cause he had stood for; and spoke very confidently of his being presently at the right hand of Christ; and in all, things appeared the most resolved man that ever died in that manner, and showed more of heat than cowardize, but yet with all humility and gravity. One asked him why he did not pray for the King. He answered, “Nay,” says he, “you shall see I can pray for the King: I pray God bless him!” The King had given his body to his friends; and, therefore, he told them that he hoped they would be civil to his body when dead; and desired they would let him die like a gentleman and a Christian, and not crowded and pressed as he was. So to the office a little, and so to the Trinity-house all of us to dinner; and then to the office again all the afternoon till night. So home and to bed. This day, I hear, my Lord Peterborough is come unexpected from Tangier, to give the King an account of the place, which, we fear, is in none of the best condition. We had also certain news today that the Spaniard is before Lisbon with thirteen sail; six Dutch, and the rest his own ships; which will, I fear, be ill for Portugal. I writ a letter of all this day’s proceedings to my Lord, at Hinchingbroke, who, I hear, is very well pleased with the work there.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-6-25" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-06-25">15th (Lord’s day)</time>. To church in the morning and home to dinner, where come my brother Tom and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fisher, my cousin, Nan Pepys’s second husband, who, I perceive, is a very good-humoured man, an old cavalier. I made as much of him as I could, and were merry, and am glad she hath light of so good a man. They gone, to church again; but my wife not being dressed as I would have her, I was angry, and she, when she was out of doors in her way to church, returned home again vexed. But I to church, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mills, an ordinary sermon. So home, and found my wife and Sarah gone to a neighbour church, at which I was not much displeased. By and by she comes again, and, after a word or two, good friends. And then her brother came to see her, and he being gone she told me that she believed he was married and had a wife worth £500 to him, and did inquire how he might dispose the money to the best advantage, but I forbore to advise her till she could certainly tell me how things are with him, being loth to meddle too soon with him. So to walk upon the leads, and to supper, and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-6-26" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-06-26">16th</time>. Up before four o’clock, and after some business took Will forth, and he and I walked over the Tower Hill, but the gate not being open we walked through <abbr>St.</abbr> Catharine’s and Ratcliffe (I think it is) by the waterside above a mile before we could get a boat, and so over the water in a scull (which I have not done a great while), and walked finally to Deptford, where I saw in what forwardness the work is for Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten’s house and mine, and it is almost ready. I also, with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Davis, did view my cousin Joyce’s tallow, and compared it with the Irish tallow we bought lately, and found ours much more white, but as soft as it; now what is the fault, or whether it be or no a fault, I know not. So walked home again as far as over against the Towre, and so over and home, where I found Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn and Sir John Minnes discoursing about Sir John Minnes’s house and his coming to live with us, and I think he intends to have <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turner’s house and he to come to his lodgings, which I shall be very glad of. We three did go to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turner’s to view his house, which I think was to the end that Sir John Minnes might see it. Then by water with my wife to the Wardrobe, and dined there; and in the afternoon with all the children by water to Greenwich, where I showed them the King’s yacht, the house, and the park, all very pleasant; and so to the tavern, and had the music of the house, and so merrily home again. Will and I walked home from the Wardrobe, having left my wife at the Tower Wharf coming by, whom I found gone to bed not very well.⁠ ⁠… So to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-6-27" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-06-27">17th</time>. Up, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mayland comes to me and borrowed 30<abbr>s.</abbr> of me to be paid again out of the money coming to him in the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">James</i> and <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Charles</i> for his late voyage. So to the office, where all the morning. So home to dinner, my wife not being well, but however dined with me. So to the office, and at Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten’s, where we all met by chance and talked, and they drank wine; but I forebore all their healths. Sir John Minnes, I perceive, is most excellent company. So home and to bed betimes by daylight.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-6-28" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-06-28">18th</time>. Up early; and after reading a little in Cicero, I made me ready and to my office, where all the morning very busy. At noon <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed came to me about business, and he and I walked as far as Lincoln’s Inn Fields together. After a turn or two in the walks we parted, and I to my Lord Crew’s and dined with him; where I hear the courage of Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Vane at his death is talked on everywhere as a miracle. Thence to Somerset House to Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Winter’s chamber by appointment, and met <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pett, where he and I read over his last contract with the King for the Forest of Dean, whereof I took notes because of this new one that he is now in making. That done he and I walked to Lilly’s,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1449" id="noteref-1449" epub:type="noteref">1449</a> the painter’s, where we saw among other rare things, the Duchess of York, her whole body, sitting instate in a chair, in white sattin, and another of the King, that is not finished; most rare things. I did give the fellow something that showed them us, and promised to come some other time, and he would show me Lady Castlemaine’s, which I could not then see, it being locked up! Thence to Wright’s,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1450" id="noteref-1450" epub:type="noteref">1450</a> the painter’s: but, Lord! the difference that is between their two works. Thence to the Temple, and there spoke with my cousin Roger, who gives me little hopes in the business between my Uncle Tom and us. So <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pett (who stayed at his son’s chamber) and I by coach to the old Exchange, and there parted, and I home and at the office till night. My windows at my office are made clean today and a casement in my closet. So home, and after some merry discourse in the kitchen with my wife and maids as I nowadays often do, I being well pleased with both my maids, to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-6-29" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-06-29">19th</time>. Up by five o’clock, and while my man Will was getting himself ready to come up to me I took and played upon my lute a little. So to dress myself, and to my office to prepare things against we meet this morning. We sat long today, and had a great private business before us about contracting with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Rider, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cutler, and Captain Cocke, for 500 ton of hemp, which we went through, and I am to draw up the conditions. Home to dinner, where I found <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore, and he and I cast up our accounts together and evened them, and then with the last chest of crusados to Alderman Backwell’s, by the same token his lady going to take coach stood in the shop, and having a gilded glassfull of perfumed comfits given her by Don Duarte de Silva,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1451" id="noteref-1451" epub:type="noteref">1451</a> the Portugal merchant, that is come over with the Queen, I did offer at a taste, and so she poured some out into my hand, and, though good, yet pleased me the better coming from a pretty lady. So home and at the office preparing papers and things, and indeed my head has not been so full of business a great while, and with so much pleasure, for I begin to see the pleasure it gives. God give me health. So to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-6-30" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-06-30">20th</time>. Up by four or five o’clock, and to the office, and there drew up the agreement between the King and Sir John Winter<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1452" id="noteref-1452" epub:type="noteref">1452</a> about the Forrest of Deane; and having done it, he came himself (I did not know him to be the Queen’s Secretary before, but observed him to be a man of fine parts); and we read it, and both liked it well. That done, I turned to the Forrest of Deane, in Speede’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mapps</i>, and there he showed me how it lies; and the Lea-bayly,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1453" id="noteref-1453" epub:type="noteref">1453</a> with the great charge of carrying it to Lydny, and many other things worth my knowing; and I do perceive that I am very short in my business by not knowing many times the geographical part of my business. At my office till <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore took me out and at my house looked over our papers again, and upon our evening accounts did give full discharges one to the other, and in his and many other accounts I perceive I shall be better able to give a true balance of my estate to myself within a day or two than I have been this twelve months. Then he and I to Alderman Backwell’s and did the like there, and I gave one receipt for all the money I have received thence upon the receipt of my Lord’s crusados. Then I went to the Exchange, and hear that the merchants have a great fear of a breach with the Spaniard; for they think he will not brook our having Tangier, Dunkirk, and Jamaica; and our merchants begin to draw home their estates as fast as they can. Then to Pope’s Head Ally, and there bought me a pair of tweezers, cost me 14<abbr>s.</abbr>, the first thing like a bauble I have bought a good while, but I do it with some trouble of mind, though my conscience tells me that I do it with an apprehension of service in my office to have a book to write memorandums in, and a pair of compasses in it; but I confess myself the willinger to do it because I perceive by my accounts that I shall be better by £30 than I expected to be. But by tomorrow night I intend to see to the bottom of all my accounts. Then home to dinner, where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore met me. Then he went away, and I to the office and dispatch much business. So in the evening, my wife and I and Jane over the water to the Halfway-house, a pretty, pleasant walk, but the wind high. So home again and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-7-1" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-07-01">21st</time>. Up about four o’clock, and settled some private business of my own, then made me ready and to the office to prepare things for our meeting today. By and by we met, and at noon Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn and I to the Trinity House; where was a feast made by the Wardens, when great good cheer, and much, but ordinary company. The Lieutenant of the Tower, upon my demanding how Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Vane died, told me that he died in a passion; but all confess with so much courage as never man died. Thence to the office, where Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Rider, <abbr>Capt.</abbr> Cocke, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cutler came by appointment to meet me to confer about the contract between us and them for 500 tons of hemp. That being done, I did other business and so went home, and there found <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed, who stayed talking with my wife and me an hour or two, and I put on my riding cloth suit, only for him to see how it is, and I think it will do very well. He being gone, and I hearing from my wife and the maids’ complaints made of the boy, I called him up, and with my whip did whip him till I was not able to stir, and yet I could not make him confess any of the lies that they tax him with. At last, not willing to let him go away a conqueror, I took him in task again, and pulled off his frock to his shirt, and whipped him till he did confess that he did drink the whey, which he had denied, and pulled a pink, and above all did lay the candlestick upon the ground in his chamber, which he had denied this quarter of a year. I confess it is one of the greatest wonders that ever I met with that such a little boy as he could possibly be able to suffer half so much as he did to maintain a lie. I think I must be forced to put him away. So to bed, with my arm very weary.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-7-2" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-07-02">22nd (Lord’s day)</time>. This day I first put on my slasht doublet, which I like very well. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shepley came to me in the morning, telling me that he and my Lord came to town from Hinchinbroke last night. He and I spend an hour in looking over his account, and then walked to the Wardrobe, all the way discoursing of my Lord’s business. He tells me to my great wonder that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Barnwell is dead £500 in debt to my Lord. By and by my Lord came from church, and I dined, with some others, with him, he very merry, and after dinner took me aside and talked of state and other matters. By and by to my brother Tom’s and took him out with me homewards (calling at the Wardrobe to talk a little with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore), and so to my house, where I paid him all I owed him, and did make the £20 I lately lent him up to £40, for which he shall give bond to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shepley, for it is his money. So my wife and I to walk in the garden, where all our talk was against Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn, against whom I have lately had cause to be much prejudiced. By and by he and his daughter came out to walk, so we took no notice of them a great while, at last in going home spoke a word or two, and so good night, and to bed. This day I am told of a Portugal lady, at Hampton Court, that hath dropped a child already since the Queen’s coming, but the king would not have them searched whose it is; and so it is not commonly known yet. Coming home tonight, I met with <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Will.</abbr> Swan, who do talk as high for the Fanatiques as ever he did in his life; and do pity my Lord Sandwich and me that we should be given up to the wickedness of the world; and that a fall is coming upon us all; for he finds that he and his company are the true spirit of the nation, and the greater part of the nation too, who will have liberty of conscience in spite of this “Act of Uniformity,” or they will die; and if they may not preach abroad, they will preach in their own houses. He told me that certainly Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Vane must be gone to Heaven, for he died as much a martyr and saint as ever man did; and that the King hath lost more by that man’s death, than he will get again a good while. At all which I know not what to think; but, I confess, I do think that the Bishops will never be able to carry it so high as they do.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-7-3" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-07-03">23rd</time>. Up early, this morning, and my people are taking down the hangings and things in my house because of the great dust that is already made by the pulling down of Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten’s house, and will be by my own when I come to it. To my office, and there hard at work all the morning. At noon to the Exchange to meet <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Williams, who sent me this morning notice of his going into the country tomorrow, but could not find him, but meeting with Frank Moore, my Lord Lambeth’s man formerly, we, and two or three friends of his did go to a tavern, and there they drank, but I nothing but small beer. In the next room one was playing very finely of the dulcimer, which well played I like well, but one of our own company, a talking fellow, did in discourse say much of this Act against Seamen,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1454" id="noteref-1454" epub:type="noteref">1454</a> for their being brought to account; and that it was made on purpose for my Lord Sandwich, who was in debt £100,000, and hath been forced to have pardon oftentimes from Oliver for the same: at which I was vexed at him, but thought it not worth my trouble to oppose what he said, but took leave and went home, and after a little dinner to my office again, and in the evening Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Warren came to me about business, and that being done, discoursing of deals, I did offer to go along with him among his deal ships, which we did to half a score, where he showed me the difference between Dram, Swinsound, Christiania, and others, and told me many pleasant notions concerning their manner of cutting and sawing them by watermills, and the reason how deals become dearer and cheaper, among others, when the snow is not so great as to fill up the values that they may pass from hill to hill over the snow, then it is dear carriage. From on board he took me to his yard, where vast and many places of deals, sparrs, and bulks, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, the difference between which I never knew before, and indeed am very proud of this evening’s work. He had me into his house, which is most pretty and neat and well furnished. After a glass, not of wine, for I would not be tempted to drink any, but a glass of mum, I well home by water, but it being late was forced to land at the Custom House, and so home and to bed, and after I was abed, letters came from the Duke for the fitting out of four ships forthwith from Portsmouth (I know not yet for what) so I was forced to make Will get them wrote, and signed them in bed and sent them away by express. And so to sleep.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-7-4" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-07-04">24th (Midsummer day)</time>. Up early and to my office, putting things in order against we sit. There came to me my cousin Harry Alcocke, whom I much respect, to desire (by a letter from my father to me, where he had been some days) my help for him to some place. I proposed the sea to him, and I think he will take it, and I hope do well. Sat all the morning, and I bless God I find that by my diligence of late and still, I do get ground in the office every day. At noon to the ’Change, where I begin to be known also, and so home to dinner, and then to the office all the afternoon dispatching business. At night news is brought me that Field the rogue hath this day cast me at Guildhall in £30 for his imprisonment, to which I signed his commitment with the rest of the officers; but they having been parliament-men, that he hath begun the law with me; and threatens more, but I hope the Duke of York will bear me out. At night home, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Spong came to me, and so he and I sat singing upon the leads till almost ten at night and so he went away (a pretty, harmless, and ingenious man), and I to bed, in a very great content of mind, which I hope by my care still in my business will continue to me.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-7-5" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-07-05">25th</time>. Up by four o’clock, and put my accounts with my Lord into a very good order, and so to my office, where having put many things in order I went to the Wardrobe, but found my Lord gone to Hampton Court. After discourse with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shepley we parted, and I into Thames Street, beyond the Bridge, and there enquired among the shops the price of tar and oil, and do find great content in it, and hope to save the King money by this practice. So home to dinner, and then to the ’Change, and so home again, and at the office preparing business against tomorrow all the afternoon. At night walked with my wife upon the leads, and so to supper and to bed. My wife having lately a great pain in her ear, for which this night she begins to take physic, and I have got cold and so have a great deal of my old pain.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-7-6" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-07-06">26th</time>. Up and took physic, but such as to go abroad with, only to loosen me, for I am bound. So to the office, and there all the morning sitting till noon, and then took Commissioner Pett home to dinner with me, where my stomach was turned when my sturgeon came to table, upon which I saw very many little worms creeping, which I suppose was through the staleness of the pickle. He being gone, comes <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Nicholson,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1455" id="noteref-1455" epub:type="noteref">1455</a> my old fellow-student at Magdalene, and we played three or four things upon the violin and basse, and so parted, and I to my office till night, and there came <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shepley and Creed in order to settling some accounts of my Lord tonight, and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-7-7" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-07-07">27th</time>. Up early, not quite rid of my pain. I took more physic, and so made myself ready to go forth. So to my Lord, who rose as soon as he heard I was there; and in his nightgown and shirt stood talking with me alone two hours, I believe, concerning his greatest matters of state and interest. Among other things, that his greatest design is, first, to get clear of all debts to the King for the Embassy money, and then a pardon. Then, to get his land settled; and then to, discourse and advise what is best for him, whether to keep his sea employment longer or no. For he do discern that the Duke would be willing to have him out, and that by Coventry’s means. And here he told me, how the terms at Argier<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1456" id="noteref-1456" epub:type="noteref">1456</a> were wholly his; and that he did plainly tell Lawson and agree with him, that he would have the honour of them, if they should ever be agreed to; and that accordingly they did come over hither entitled, “Articles concluded on by Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Lawson, according to instructions received from His Royal Highness James Duke of York, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, and from His Excellency the Earl of Sandwich.” (Which however was more than needed; but Lawson tells my Lord in his letter, that it was not he, but the Council of War that would have “His Royal Highness” put into the title, though he did not contribute one word to it.) But the Duke of York did yesterday propose them to the Council, to be printed with this title: “Concluded on, by Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Lawson, <abbr>Knt.</abbr>” and my Lord quite left out. Here I find my Lord very politique; for he tells me, that he discerns they design to set up Lawson as much as they can and that he do counterplot them by setting him up higher still; by which they will find themselves spoiled of their design, and at last grow jealous of Lawson. This he told me with much pleasure; and that several of the Duke’s servants, by name my Lord Barkeley [of Stratton], <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Talbot, and others, had complained to my Lord, of Coventry, and would have him out. My Lord do acknowledge that his greatest obstacle is Coventry. He did seem to hint such a question as this: “Hitherto I have been supported by the King and Chancellor against the Duke; but what if it should come about, that it should be the Duke and Chancellor against the King?” which, though he said it in these plain words, yet I could not fully understand it; but may more here after. My Lord did also tell me, that the Duke himself at Portsmouth did thank my Lord for all his pains and care; and that he perceived it must be the old Captains that must do the business; and that the new ones would spoil all. And that my Lord did very discreetly tell the Duke (though quite against his judgement and inclination), that, however, the King’s new captains ought to be borne with a little and encouraged. By which he will oblige that party, and prevent, as much as may be, their envy; but he says that certainly things will go to rack if ever the old captains should be wholly out, and the new ones only command. Then we fell to talk of Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes, of whom my Lord hath a very slight opinion, and that at first he did come to my Lord very displeased and sullen, and had studied and turned over all his books to see whether it had ever been that two flags should ride together in the main-top, but could not find it, nay, he did call his captains on board to consult them. So when he came by my Lord’s side, he took down his flag, and all the day did not hoist it again, but next day my Lord did tell him that it was not so fit to ride without a flag, and therefore told him that he should wear it in the foretop, for it seems my Lord saw his instructions, which were that he should not wear his flag in the maintop in the presence of the Duke or my Lord. But that after that my Lord did caress him, and he do believe him as much his friend as his interest will let him. I told my Lord of the late passage between Swan and me, and he told me another lately between <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Dell and himself when he was in the country. At last we concluded upon dispatching all his accounts as soon as possible, and so I parted, and to my office, where I met Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn, and he desired a turn with me in the garden, where he told me the day now was fixed for his going into Ireland;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1457" id="noteref-1457" epub:type="noteref">1457</a> and that whereas I had mentioned some service he could do a friend of mine there, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Saml.</abbr> Pepys,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1458" id="noteref-1458" epub:type="noteref">1458</a> he told me he would most readily do what I would command him, and then told me we must needs eat a dish of meat together before he went, and so invited me and my wife on Sunday next. To all which I did give a cold consent, for my heart cannot love or have a good opinion of him since his last playing the knave with me, but he took no notice of our difference at all, nor I to him, and so parted, and I by water to Deptford, where I found Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten alone paying off the yard three quarters pay. Thence to dinner, where too great a one was prepared, at which I was very much troubled, and wished I had not been there. After dinner comes Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes and some captains with him, who had been at a Councill of War today, who tell us they have acquitted Captain Hall, who was accused of cowardice in letting of old Winter, the Argier pyrate, go away from him with a prize or two; and also Captain Diamond of the murder laid to him of a man that he had struck, but he lived many months after, till being drunk, he fell into the hold, and there broke his jaw and died, but they say there are such bawdy articles against him as never were heard of.⁠ ⁠… To the pay again, where I left them, and walked to Redriffe, and so home, and there came <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed and Shepley to me, and stayed till night about my Lord’s accounts, our proceeding to set them in order, and so parted and I to bed. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Holliard had been with my wife today, and cured her of her pain in her ear by taking out a most prodigious quantity of hard wax that had hardened itself in the bottom of the ear, of which I am very glad.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-7-8" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-07-08">28th</time>. Up to my Lord’s and my own accounts, and so to the office, where all the forenoon sitting, and at noon by appointment to the Mitre, where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shepley gave me and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed, and I had my uncle Wight with us, a dish of fish. Thence to the office again, and there all the afternoon till night, and so home, and after talking with my wife to bed. This day a genteel woman came to me, claiming kindred of me, as she had once done before, and borrowed 10<abbr>s.</abbr> of me, promising to repay it at night, but I hear nothing of her. I shall trust her no more. Great talk there is of a fear of a war with the Dutch; and we have order to pitch upon twenty ships to be forthwith set out; but I hope it is but a scarecrow to the world, to let them see that we can be ready for them; though, God knows! the King is not able to set out five ships at this present without great difficulty, we neither having money, credit, nor stores. My mind is now in a wonderful condition of quiet and content, more than ever in all my life, since my minding the business of my office, which I have done most constantly; and I find it to be the very effect of my late oaths against wine and plays, which, if God please, I will keep constant in, for now my business is a delight to me, and brings me great credit, and my purse encreases too.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-7-9" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-07-09">29th (Lord’s day)</time>. Up by four o’clock, and to the settling of my own accounts, and I do find upon my monthly ballance, which I have undertaken to keep from month to month, that I am worth £650, the greatest sum that ever I was yet master of. I pray God give me a thankfull spirit, and care to improve and encrease it. To church with my wife, who this day put on her green petticoat of flowred satin, with fine white and gimp lace of her own putting on, which is very pretty. Home with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn to dinner by appointment, and to church again in the afternoon, and then home, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shepley coming to me about my Lord’s accounts, and in the evening parted, and we to supper again to Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn. Whatever the matter is, he do much fawn upon me, and I perceive would not fall out with me, and his daughter mighty officious to my wife, but I shall never be deceived again by him, but do hate him and his traitorous tricks with all my heart. It was an invitation in order to his taking leave of us today, he being to go for Ireland in a few days. So home and prayers, and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-7-10" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-07-10">30th</time>. Up betimes, and to my office, where I found Griffen’s girl making it clean, but, God forgive me! what a mind I had to her, but did not meddle with her. She being gone, I fell upon boring holes for me to see from my closet into the great office, without going forth, wherein I please myself much. So settled to business, and at noon with my wife to the Wardrobe, and there dined, and stayed talking all the afternoon with my Lord, and about four o’clock took coach with my wife and Lady, and went toward my house, calling at my Lady Carteret’s, who was within by chance (she keeping altogether at Deptford for a month or two), and so we sat with her a little. Among other things told my Lady how my Lady Fanshaw<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1459" id="noteref-1459" epub:type="noteref">1459</a> is fallen out with her only for speaking in behalf of the French, which my Lady wonders at, they having been formerly like sisters, but we see there is no true lasting friendship in the world. Thence to my house, where I took great pride to lead her through the Court by the hand, she being very fine, and her page carrying up her train. She stayed a little at my house, and then walked through the garden, and took water, and went first on board the King’s pleasure boat, which pleased her much. Then to Greenwich Park; and with much ado she was able to walk up to the top of the hill, and so down again, and took boat, and so through bridge to Blackfryers, and home, she being much pleased with the ramble in every particular of it. So we supped with her, and then walked home, and to bed.</p>
				<section id="observations">
					<header>
						<p>
							<b>Observations</b>
						</p>
					</header>
					<p>This I take to be as bad a juncture as ever I observed. The King and his new Queen minding their pleasures at Hampton Court. All people discontented; some that the King do not gratify them enough; and the others, Fanatiques of all sorts, that the King do take away their liberty of conscience; and the height of the Bishops, who I fear will ruin all again. They do much cry up the manner of Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Vane’s death, and he deserves it. They clamour against the chimney-money, and say they will not pay it without force. And in the meantime, like to have war abroad; and Portugal to assist, when we have not money to pay for any ordinary layings-out at home. Myself all in dirt about building of my house and Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten’s a story higher. Into a good way, fallen on minding my business and saving money, which God encrease; and I do take great delight in it, and see the benefit of it. In a longing mind of going to see Brampton, but cannot get three days time, do what I can. In very good health, my wife and myself.</p>
				</section>
			</article>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
