<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>March 1659–60</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-3" epub:type="chapter z3998:diary">
			<h2 epub:type="title">March 1659⁠–⁠60</h2>
			<article id="entry-1660-3-11" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-03-11">March 1st</time>. In the morning went to my Lord’s lodgings, thinking to have spoke with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply, having not been to visit him since my coming to town. But he being not within I went up, and out of the box where my Lord’s pamphlets lay, I chose as many as I had a mind to have for my own use and left the rest. Then to my office, where little to do, abut <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply comes to me, so at dinner time he and I went to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s, whither <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thomas<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-275" id="noteref-275" epub:type="noteref">275</a> was newly come to town, being sent with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Yelverton,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-276" id="noteref-276" epub:type="noteref">276</a> my old schoolfellow at Paul’s School, to bring the thanks of the county to General Monk for the return of the Parliament. But old <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew and my Lord not coming home to dinner, we tarried late before we went to dinner, it being the day that John, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> John Crew’s coachman, was to be buried in the afternoon, he being a day or two before killed with a blow of one of his horses that struck his skull into his brain. From thence <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply and I went into London to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Laxton’s; my Lord’s apothecary, and so by water to Westminster, where at the Sun<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-277" id="noteref-277" epub:type="noteref">277</a> he and I spent two or three hours in a pint or two of wine, discoursing of matters in the country, among other things telling me that my uncle did to him make a very kind mention of me, and what he would do for me. Thence I went home, and went to bed betimes. This day the Parliament did vote that they would not sit longer than the 15th day of this month.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-3-12" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-03-12">2nd</time>. This morning I went early to my Lord at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s, where I spoke to him. Here were a great many come to see him, as Secretary Thurlow who is now by this Parliament chosen again Secretary of State. There were also General Monk’s trumpeters to give my Lord a sound of their trumpets this morning. Thence I went to my office, and wrote a letter to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing about the business of his house. Then going home, I met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Eglin, Chetwind, and Thomas, who took me to the Leg in King’s street,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-278" id="noteref-278" epub:type="noteref">278</a> where we had two brave dishes of meat, one of fish, a carp and some other fishes, as well done as ever I ate any. After that to the Swan tavern, where we drank a quart or two of wine, and so parted. So I to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jem and took <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore with me (who I met in the street), and there I met <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Howe and Sheply. After that to Westminster Hall, where I saw Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Booth at liberty. This day I hear the City militia is put into good posture, and it is thought that Monk will not be able to do any great matter against them now, if he have a mind. I understand that my Lord Lambert did yesterday send a letter to the Council, and that tonight he is to come and appear to the Council in person. Sir Arthur Haselrigge do not yet appear in the House. Great is the talk of a single person, and that it would now be Charles, George, or Richard again.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-279" id="noteref-279" epub:type="noteref">279</a> For the last of which, my Lord <abbr>St.</abbr> John is said to speak high. Great also is the dispute now in the House, in whose name the writs shall run for the next Parliament; and it is said that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Prin, in open House, said, “In King Charles’s.”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-280" id="noteref-280" epub:type="noteref">280</a> From Westminster Hall home. Spent the evening in my study, and so after some talk with my wife, then to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-3-13" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-03-13">3rd</time>. To Westminster Hall, where I found that my Lord was last night voted one of the Generals at Sea, and Monk the other. I met my Lord in the Hall, who bid me come to him at noon. I met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierce the purser, <abbr>Lieut.</abbr> Lambert, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-281" id="noteref-281" epub:type="noteref">281</a> and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Will.</abbr> Howe, and went with them to the Swan tavern. Up to my office, but did nothing. At noon home to dinner to a sheep’s head. My brother Tom came and dined with me, and told me that my mother was not very well, and that my Aunt Fenner was very ill too. After dinner I to Warwick House,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-282" id="noteref-282" epub:type="noteref">282</a> in Holborn, to my Lord, where he dined with my Lord of Manchester,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-283" id="noteref-283" epub:type="noteref">283</a> Sir Dudley North,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-284" id="noteref-284" epub:type="noteref">284</a> my Lord Fiennes,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-285" id="noteref-285" epub:type="noteref">285</a> and my Lord Barkly.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-286" id="noteref-286" epub:type="noteref">286</a> I stayed in the great hall, talking with some gentlemen there, till they all come out. Then I, by coach with my Lord, to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s, in our way talking of public things, and how I should look after getting of his Commissioner’s despatch. He told me he feared there was new design hatching, as if Monk had a mind to get into the saddle. Here I left him, and went by appointment to Hering, the merchant, but missed of my money, at which I was much troubled, but could not help myself. Returning, met <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gifford, who took me and gave me half a pint of wine, and told me, as I hear this day from many, that things are in a very doubtful posture, some of the Parliament being willing to keep the power in their hands. After I had left him, I met with Tom Harper, who took me into a place in Drury Lane, where we drank a great deal of strong water,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-287" id="noteref-287" epub:type="noteref">287</a> more than ever I did in my life at one time before. He talked huge high that my Lord Protector would come in place again, which indeed is much discoursed of again, though I do not see it possible. Hence home and wrote to my father at Brampton by the post. So to bed. This day I was told that my Lord General Fleetwood told my lord that he feared the King of Sweden<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-288" id="noteref-288" epub:type="noteref">288</a> is dead of a fever at Gottenburg.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-3-14" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-03-14">4th</time>. Lord’s day. Before I went to church I sang Orpheus’ Hymn<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-289" id="noteref-289" epub:type="noteref">289</a> to my viol. After that to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gunning’s, an excellent sermon upon charity. Then to my mother to dinner, where my wife and the maid were come. After dinner we three to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Messum’s where we met <abbr>Mons.</abbr> L’Impertinent, who got us a seat and told me a ridiculous story how that last week he had caused a simple citizen to spend £80 in entertainments of him and some friends of his upon pretence of some service that he would do him in his suit after a widow. Then to my mother again, and after supper she and I talked very high about religion, I in defence of the religion I was born in. Then home.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-3-15" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-03-15">5th</time>. Early in the morning <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hill comes to string my theorbo,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-290" id="noteref-290" epub:type="noteref">290</a> which we were about till past ten o’clock, with a great deal of pleasure. Then to Westminster, where I met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pinkney at Will’s, who took me by water to Billingsgate, at the Salutation Tavern,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-291" id="noteref-291" epub:type="noteref">291</a> whither by-and-by, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Talbot and Adams came, and bring a great [deal of] good meat, a ham of bacon, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> Here we stayed and drank till <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Adams began to be overcome. Then we parted, and so to Westminster by water, only seeing <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pinkney at his own house, where he showed me how he had alway kept the Lion and Unicorn, in the back of his chimney, bright, in expectation of the King’s coming again. At home I found <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hunt, who told me how the Parliament had voted that the Covenant be printed and hung in churches again. Great hopes of the King’s coming again. To bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-3-16" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-03-16">6th</time>. (Shrove Tuesday.) I called <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply and we both went up to my Lord’s lodgings at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s, where he bade us to go home again, and get a fire against an hour after. Which we did at Whitehall, whither he came, and after talking with him and me about his going to sea, he called me by myself to go along with him into the garden, where he asked me how things were with me, and what he had endeavoured to do with my uncle to get him to do something for me but he would say nothing too. He likewise bade me look out now at this turn some good place, and he would use all his own, and all the interest of his friends that he had in England, to do me good. And asked me whether I could, without too much inconvenience, go to sea as his secretary, and bid me think of it. He also began to talk of things of State, and told me that he should want one in that capacity at sea, that he might trust in, and therefore he would have me to go. He told me also, that he did believe the King would come in, and did discourse with me about it, and about the affection of the people and City, at which I was full glad. After he was gone, I waiting upon him through the garden till he came to the Hall, where I left him and went up to my office, where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hawly brought one to me, a seaman, that had promised £10 to him if he get him a purser’s place, which I think to endeavour to do. Here comes my uncle Tom, whom I took to Will’s and drank with, poor man, he comes to inquire about the knights of Windsor, of which he desires to get to be one.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-292" id="noteref-292" epub:type="noteref">292</a> While we were drinking, in comes <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Day, a carpenter in Westminster, to tell me that it was Shrove Tuesday, and that I must go with him to their yearly Club upon this day, which I confess I had quite forgot. So I went to the Bell, where were <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Eglin, Veezy, Vincent a butcher, one more, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Tanner, with whom I played upon a viol, and he a violin, after dinner, and were very merry, with a special good dinner, a leg of veal and bacon, two capons and sausages and fritters, with abundance of wine. After that I went home, where I found Kate Sterpin who hath not been here a great while before. She gone I went to see <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jem, at whose chamber door I found a couple of ladies, but she not being there, we hunted her out, and found that she and another had hid themselves behind a door. Well, they all went down into the dining-room, where it was full of tag, rag, and bobtail, dancing, singing, and drinking, of which I was ashamed, and after I had stayed a dance or two I went away. Going home, called at my Lord’s for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply, but found him at the Lion with a pewterer, that he had bought pewter today of. With them I drank, and so home and wrote by the post, by my Lord’s command, for <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Goods<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-293" id="noteref-293" epub:type="noteref">293</a> to come up presently. For my Lord intends to go forthwith into the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Swiftsure</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-294" id="noteref-294" epub:type="noteref">294</a> till the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nazeby</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-295" id="noteref-295" epub:type="noteref">295</a> be ready. This day I hear that the Lords do intend to sit, and great store of them are now in town, and I see in the Hall today. Overton<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-296" id="noteref-296" epub:type="noteref">296</a> at Hull do stand out, but can, it is thought, do nothing; and Lawson, it is said, is gone with some ships thither, but all that is nothing. My Lord told me, that there was great endeavours to bring in the Protector again; but he told me, too, that he did believe it would not last long if he were brought in; no, nor the King neither (though he seems to think that he will come in), unless he carry himself very soberly and well. Everybody now drinks the King’s health without any fear, whereas before it was very private that a man dare do it. Monk this day is feasted at Mercers’ Hall, and is invited one after another to all the twelve Halls in London.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-297" id="noteref-297" epub:type="noteref">297</a> Many think that he is honest yet, and some or more think him to be a fool that would raise himself, but think that he will undo himself by endeavouring it. My mind, I must needs remember, has been very much eased and joyed at my Lord’s great expressions of kindness this day, and in discourse thereupon my wife and I lay awake an hour or two in our bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-3-17" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-03-17">7th</time>. (Ash Wednesday.) In the morning I went to my Lord at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s, in my way Washington overtook me and told me upon my question whether he knew of any place now void that I might have, by power over friends, that this day <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Montagu was to be made <i xml:lang="la">Custos Rotulorum</i> for Westminster, and that by friends I might get to be named by him Clerk of the Peace, with which I was, as I am at all new things, very much joyed, so when I came to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s, I spoke to my Lord about it, who told me he believed <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Montagu had already promised it, and that it was given him only that he might gratify one person with the place I look for. Here, among many that were here, I met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lynes, the surgeon, who promised me some seeds of the sensitive plant.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-298" id="noteref-298" epub:type="noteref">298</a> I spoke too with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierce the surgeon, who gave me great encouragement to go to sea with my Lord. Thence going homewards, my Lord overtook me in his coach, and called me in, and so I went with him to <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Montagu being gone to Whitehall, we walked over the Park thither, all the way he discoursing of the times, and of the change of things since the last year, and wondering how he could bear with so great disappointment as he did. He did give me the best advice that he could what was best for me, whether to stay or go with him, and offered all the ways that could be, how he might do me good, with the greatest liberty and love that could be. I left him at Whitehall, and myself went to Westminster to my office, whither nothing to do, but I did discourse with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Falconbridge about Le Squire’s place, and had his consent to get it if I could. I afterwards in the Hall met with <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Simons, who put me in the best way how to get it done. Thence by appointment to the Angel<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-299" id="noteref-299" epub:type="noteref">299</a> in King Street, where Chetwind, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thomas and Doling were at oysters, and beginning Lent this day with a fish dinner. After dinner <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thomas and I by water to London, where I went to Herring’s and received the £50 of my Lord’s upon Frank’s bill from Worcester. I gave in the bill and set my hand to his bill. Thence I went to the Pope’s Head Alley and called on Adam Chard, and bought a catcall there, it cost me two groats. Thence went and gave him a cup of ale. After that to the Sun behind the Exchange,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-300" id="noteref-300" epub:type="noteref">300</a> where meeting my uncle Wight by the way, took him with me thither, and after drinking a health or two round at the Cock<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-301" id="noteref-301" epub:type="noteref">301</a> (<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thomas being gone thither), we parted, he and I homewards, parted at Fleet Street, where I found my father newly come home from Brampton<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-302" id="noteref-302" epub:type="noteref">302</a> very well. He left my uncle with his leg very dangerous, and do believe he cannot continue in that condition long. He tells me that my uncle did acquaint him very largely what he did intend to do with his estate, to make me his heir and give my brother Tom something, and that my father and mother should have likewise something, to raise portions for John and Pall.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-303" id="noteref-303" epub:type="noteref">303</a> I pray God he may be as good as his word. Here I stayed and supped and so home, there being Joyce Norton there and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Ch.</abbr> Glascock. Going home I called at Wotton’s and took home a piece of cheese. At home <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply sat with me a little while, and so we all to bed. This news and my Lord’s great kindness makes me very cheerful within. I pray God make me thankful. This day, according to order, Sir Arthur [Haselrigge] appeared at the House; what was done I know not, but there was all the Rumpers almost come to the House today. My Lord did seem to wonder much why Lambert was so willing to be put into the Tower, and thinks he has some design in it; but I think that he is so poor that he cannot use his liberty for debts, if he were at liberty; and so it is as good and better for him to be there, than anywhere else.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-3-18" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-03-18">8th</time>. To Whitehall to bespeak some firing for my father at Short’s, and likewise to speak to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blackburne about Batters being gunner in the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Wexford</i>. Then to Westminster Hall, where there was a general damp over men’s minds and faces upon some of the Officers of the Army being about making a remonstrance against Charles Stuart or any single person; but at noon it was told, that the General had put a stop to it, so all was well again. Here I met with Jasper, who was to look for me to bring me to my Lord at the lobby; whither sending a note to my Lord, he comes out to me and gives me direction to look after getting some money for him from the Admiralty, seeing that things are so unsafe, that he would not lay out a farthing for the State, till he had received some money of theirs. Home about two o’clock, and took my wife by land to Paternoster Row, to buy some Paragon for a petticoat and so home again. In my way meeting <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore, who went home with me while I ate a bit and so back to Whitehall again, both of us. He waited at the Council for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew. I to the Admiralty, where I got the order for the money, and have taken care for the getting of it assigned upon <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hutchinson,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-304" id="noteref-304" epub:type="noteref">304</a> Treasurer for the Navy, against tomorrow. Hence going home I met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> King that belonged to the Treasurers at War and took him to Harper’s, who told me that he and the rest of his fellows are cast out of office by the new Treasurers. This afternoon, some of the Officers of the Army, and some of the Parliament, had a conference at Whitehall to make all right again, but I know not what is done. This noon I met at the Dog tavern<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-305" id="noteref-305" epub:type="noteref">305</a> Captain Philip Holland, with whom I advised how to make some advantage of my Lord’s going to sea, which he told me might be by having of five or six servants entered on board, and I to give them what wages I pleased, and so their pay to be mine; he was also very urgent to have me take the Secretary’s place, that my Lord did proffer me. At the same time in comes <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wade and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sterry, secretary to the plenipotentiary in Denmark, who brought the news of the death of the King of Sweden at Gottenburgh<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-306" id="noteref-306" epub:type="noteref">306</a> the 3rd of the last month, and he told me what a great change he found when he came here, the secluded members being restored. He also spoke very freely of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wade’s profit, which he made while he was in Zeeland, how he did believe that he cheated <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Powell, and that he made above £500 on the voyage, which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wade did very angrily deny, though I believe he was guilty enough.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-3-19" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-03-19">9th</time>. To my Lord at his lodging, and came to Westminster with him in the coach, with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dudley with him, and he in the Painted Chamber<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-307" id="noteref-307" epub:type="noteref">307</a> walked a good while; and I telling him that I was willing and ready to go with him to sea, he agreed that I should, and advised me what to write to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing about it, which I did at my office, that by my Lord’s desire I offered that my place might for a while be supplied by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore, and that I and my security should be bound by the same bond for him. I went and dined at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s, where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hawly comes to me, and I told him the business and showed him the letter promising him £20 a year, which he liked very well of. I did the same to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore, which he also took for a courtesy. In the afternoon by coach, taking <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Butler with me to the Navy Office,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-308" id="noteref-308" epub:type="noteref">308</a> about the £500 for my Lord, which I am promised to have tomorrow morning. Then by coach back again, and at Whitehall at the Council Chamber spoke with my Lord and got him to sign the acquittance for the £500, and he also told me that he had spoke to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blackburne to put off <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed and that I should come to him for direction in the employment. After this <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Butler and I to Harper’s, where we sat and drank for two hours till ten at night; the old woman she was drunk and began to talk foolishly in commendation of her son James. Home and to bed. All night troubled in my thoughts how to order my business upon this great change with me that I could not sleep, and being overheated with drink I made a promise the next morning to drink no strong drink this week, for I find that it makes me sweat and puts me quite out of order. This day it was resolved that the writs do go out in the name of the Keepers of the Liberty, and I hear that it is resolved privately that a treaty be offered with the King. And that Monk did check his soldiers highly for what they did yesterday.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-3-20" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-03-20">10th</time>. In the morning went to my father’s, whom I took in his cutting house<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-309" id="noteref-309" epub:type="noteref">309</a> and there I told him my resolution to go to sea with my Lord, and consulted with him how to dispose of my wife, and we resolved of letting her be at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bowyer’s.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-310" id="noteref-310" epub:type="noteref">310</a> Thence to the Treasurer of the Navy, where I received £500 for my Lord, and having left £200 of it with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rawlinson<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-311" id="noteref-311" epub:type="noteref">311</a> at his house for Sheply, I went with the rest to the Sun Tavern on Fish Street Hill, where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hill, Stevens and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hater<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-312" id="noteref-312" epub:type="noteref">312</a> of the Navy Office had invited me, where we had good discourse and a fine breakfast of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hater. Then by coach home, where I took occasion to tell my wife of my going to sea, who was much troubled at it, and was with some dispute at last willing to continue at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bowyer’s in my absence. After this to see <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jem and paid her maid £7, and then to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blackburne, who told me what <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed did say upon the news of my coming into his place, and that he did propose to my Lord that there should be two Secretaries, which made me go to Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Wright’s where my Lord dined and spoke with him about it, but he seemed not to agree to the motion. Hither <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Howe comes to me and so to Westminster. In the way he told me, what I was to provide and so forth against my going. He went with me to my office, whither also <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Madge comes half foxed and played the fool upon the violin that made me weary. Then to Whitehall and so home and set many of my things in order against my going. My wife was late making of caps for me, and the wench making an end of a pair of stockings that she was knitting of. So to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-3-21" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-03-21">11th</time>. (Sunday.) All the day busy without my band on, putting up my books and things, in order to my going to sea. At night my wife and I went to my father’s to supper, where <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Norton and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Chas.</abbr> Glascocke supt with us, and after supper home, where the wench had provided all things against tomorrow to wash, and so to bed, where I much troubled with my cold and coughing.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-3-22" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-03-22">12th</time>. This day the wench rose at two in the morning to wash, and my wife and I lay talking a great while. I by reason of my cold could not tell how to sleep. My wife and I to the Exchange, where we bought a great many things, where I left her and went into London, and at Bedells the bookseller’s at the Temple gate I paid £12 10<abbr>s.</abbr> 6<abbr>d.</abbr> for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fuller by his direction. So came back and at Wilkinson’s found <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply and some sea people, as the cook of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nazeby</i> and others, at dinner. Then to the White Horse in King Street, where I got <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Buddle’s horse to ride to Huntsmore<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-313" id="noteref-313" epub:type="noteref">313</a> to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bowyer’s, where I found him and all well, and willing to have my wife come and board with them while I was at sea, which was the business I went about. Here I lay and took a thing for my cold, namely a spoonful of honey and a nutmeg scraped into it, by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bowyer’s direction, and so took it into my mouth, which I found did do me much good.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-3-23" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-03-23">13th</time>. It rained hard and I got up early, and got to London by 8 o’clock at my Lord’s lodgings, who told me that I was to be secretary, and Creed to be deputy treasurer to the Fleet, at which I was troubled, but I could not help it. After that to my father’s to look after things, and so at my shoemaker’s and others. At night to Whitehall, where I met with Simons and Luellin at drink with them at Roberts at Whitehall. Then to the Admiralty, where I talked with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed till the Brothers, and they were very seemingly willing and glad that I have the place since my Lord would dispose of it otherwise than to them. Home and to bed. This day the Parliament voted all that had been done by the former Rump against the House of Lords be void, and tonight that the writs go out without any qualification. Things seem very doubtful what will be the end of all; for the Parliament seems to be strong for the King, while the soldiers do all talk against.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-3-24" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-03-24">14th</time>. To my Lord, where infinity of applications to him and to me. To my great trouble, my Lord gives me all the papers that was given to him, to put in order and give him an account of them. Here I got half-a-piece of a person of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wright’s recommending to my Lord to be Preacher of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Speaker</i> frigate.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-314" id="noteref-314" epub:type="noteref">314</a> I went hence to <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierce the surgeon with me, to speak with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Clerke,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-315" id="noteref-315" epub:type="noteref">315</a> Monk’s secretary, about getting some soldiers removed out of Huntingdon to Oundle, which my Lord told me he did to do a courtesy to the town, that he might have the greater interest in them, in the choice of the next Parliament; not that he intends to be chosen himself, but that he might have <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Montagu and my Lord Mandeville<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-316" id="noteref-316" epub:type="noteref">316</a> chose there in spite of the Bernards.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-317" id="noteref-317" epub:type="noteref">317</a> This done (where I saw General Monk and methought he seemed a dull heavy man), he and I to Whitehall, where with Luellin we dined at Marsh’s. Coming home telling my wife what we had to dinner, she had a mind to some cabbage, and I sent for some and she had it. Went to the Admiralty, where a strange thing how I am already courted by the people. This morning among others that came to me I hired a boy of Jenkins of Westminster and Burr<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-318" id="noteref-318" epub:type="noteref">318</a> to be my clerk. This night I went to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed’s chamber where he gave me the former book of the proceedings in the fleet and the Seal. Then to Harper’s where old Beard was and I took him by coach to my Lord’s, but he was not at home, but afterwards I found him out at Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Wright’s. Thence by coach, it raining hard, to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jem, where I stayed a while, and so home, and late in the night put up my things in a sea-chest that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply lent me, and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-3-25" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-03-25">15th</time>. Early packing up my things to be sent by cart with the rest of my Lord’s. So to Will’s, where I took leave of some of my friends. Here I met Tom Alcock, one that went to school with me at Huntingdon, but I had not seen him these sixteen years. So in the Hall paid and made even with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Michell; afterwards met with old Beale, and at the Axe paid him this quarter to Ladyday next. In the afternoon Dick Mathews comes to dine, and I went and drank with him at Harper’s. So into London by water, and in Fish Street my wife and I bought a bit of salmon for 8<abbr>d.</abbr> and went to the Sun Tavern and ate it, where I did promise to give her all that I have in the world but my books, in case I should die at sea. From thence homewards; in the way my wife bought linen for three smocks and other things. I went to my Lord’s and spoke with him. So home with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jem by coach and then home to my own house. From thence to the Fox in King-street to supper on a brave turkey of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hawly’s, with some friends of his there, Will Bowyer, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> After supper I went to Westminster Hall, and the Parliament sat till ten at night, thinking and being expected to dissolve themselves today, but they did not. Great talk tonight that the discontented officers did think this night to make a stir, but prevented. To the Fox again. Home with my wife, and to bed extraordinary sleepy.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-3-26" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-03-26">16th</time>. No sooner out of bed but troubled with abundance of clients, seamen. My landlord Vanly’s man came to me by my direction yesterday, for I was there at his house as I was going to London by water, and I paid him rent for my house for this quarter ending at Lady day, and took an acquittance that he wrote me from his master. Then to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply, to the Rhenish Tavern House, where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pim, the tailor, was, and gave us a morning draft and a neat’s tongue. Home and with my wife to London, we dined at my father’s, where Joyce Norton and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Armiger dined also. After dinner my wife took leave of them in order to her going tomorrow to Huntsmore. In my way home I went to the Chapel<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-319" id="noteref-319" epub:type="noteref">319</a> in Chancery Lane to bespeak papers of all sorts and other things belonging to writing against my voyage. So home, where I spent an hour or two about my business in my study. Thence to the Admiralty, and stayed a while, so home again, where Will Bowyer came to tell us that he would bear my wife company in the coach tomorrow. Then to Westminster Hall, where I heard how the Parliament had this day dissolved themselves, and did pass very cheerfully through the Hall, and the Speaker without his mace. The whole Hall was joyful thereat, as well as themselves, and now they begin to talk loud of the King. Tonight I am told, that yesterday, about five o’clock in the afternoon, one came with a ladder to the Great Exchange,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-320" id="noteref-320" epub:type="noteref">320</a> and wiped with a brush the inscription that was upon King Charles, and that there was a great bonfire made in the Exchange, and people called out “God bless. King Charles the Second!”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-321" id="noteref-321" epub:type="noteref">321</a> From the Hall I went home to bed, very sad in mind to part with my wife, but God’s will be done.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-3-27" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-03-27">17th</time>. This morning bade adieu in bed to the company of my wife. We rose and I gave my wife some money to serve her for a time, and what papers of consequence I had. Then I left her to get her ready and went to my Lord’s with my boy Eliezer to my Lord’s lodging at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s. Here I had much business with my Lord, and papers, great store, given me by my Lord to dispose of as of the rest. After that, with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore home to my house and took my wife by coach to the Chequer in Holborn, where, after we had drank, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, she took coach and so farewell. I stayed behind with Tom Alcock and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Anderson, my old chamber fellow at Cambridge his brother, and drank with them there, who were come to me thither about one that would have a place at sea. Thence with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hawly to dinner at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s. After dinner to my own house, where all things were put up into the dining-room and locked up, and my wife took the keys along with her. This day, in the presence of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore (who made it) and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hawly, I did before I went out with my wife, seal my will to her, whereby I did give her all that I have in the world, but my books which I give to my brother John, excepting only French books, which my wife is to have. In the evening at the Admiralty, I met my Lord there and got a commission for Williamson to be captain of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Harp</i> frigate,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-322" id="noteref-322" epub:type="noteref">322</a> and afterwards went by coach taking <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crips with me to my Lord and got him to sign it at table as he was at supper. And so to Westminster back again with him with me, who had a great desire to go to sea and my Lord told me that he would do him any favour. So I went home with him to his mother’s house by me in Axe Yard, where I found <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Clodius’s wife and sat there talking and hearing of old <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Crisp playing of her old lessons upon the harpsichon till it was time to go to bed. After that to bed, and Laud, her son,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-323" id="noteref-323" epub:type="noteref">323</a> lay with me in the best chamber in her house, which indeed was finely furnished.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-3-28" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-03-28">18th</time>. I rose early and went to the barber’s (Jervas) in Palace Yard and I was trimmed by him, and afterwards drank with him a cup or two of ale, and did begin to hire his man to go with me to sea. Then to my Lord’s lodging where I found Captain Williamson and gave him his commission to be Captain of the Harp, and he gave me a piece of gold and 20<abbr>s.</abbr> in silver. So to my own house, where I stayed a while and then to dinner with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shepley at my Lord’s lodgings. After that to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mossum’s, where he made a very gallant sermon upon “Pray for the life of the King and the King’s son.” (Ezra 6:10.) From thence to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s, but my Lord not being within I did not stay, but went away and met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Woodfine, who took me to an alehouse in Drury Lane, and we sat and drank together, and ate toasted cakes which were very good, and we had a great deal of mirth with the mistress of the house about them. From thence homewards, and called at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blagrave’s,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-324" id="noteref-324" epub:type="noteref">324</a> where I took up my note that he had of mine for 40<abbr>s.</abbr>, which he two years ago did give me as a pawn while he had my lute. So that all things are even between him and I. So to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Crisp, where she and her daughter and son and I sat talking till ten o’clock at night, I giving them the best advice that I could concerning their son, how he should go to sea, and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-3-29" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-03-29">19th</time>. Early to my Lord, where infinity of business to do, which makes my head full; and indeed, for these two or three days, I have not been without a great many cares and thoughts concerning them. After that to the Admiralty, where a good while with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blackburne, who told me that it was much to be feared that the King would come in, for all good men and good things were now discouraged. Thence to Wilkinson’s, where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply and I dined; and while we were at dinner, my Lord Monk’s life-guard come by with the Serjeant at Arms before them, with two Proclamations, that all Cavaliers do depart the town; but the other that all officers that were lately disbanded should do the same. The last of which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">R.</abbr> Creed,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-325" id="noteref-325" epub:type="noteref">325</a> I remember, said, that he looked upon it as if they had said, that all God’s people should depart the town. Thence with some sea officers to the Swan, where we drank wine till one comes to me to pay me some money from Worcester, <abbr>viz.</abbr>, £25. His name is Wilday. I sat in another room and took my money and drank with him till the rest of my company were gone and so we parted. Going home the water was high, and so I got Crockford to carry me over it. So home, and left my money there. All the discourse now-a-day is, that the King will come again; and for all I see, it is the wishes of all; and all do believe that it will be so. My mind is still much troubled for my poor wife, but I hope that this undertaking will be worth my pains. To Whitehall and stayed about business at the Admiralty late, then to Tony Robins’s, where <abbr>Capt.</abbr> Stokes, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Luddington and others were, and I did solicit the Captain for Laud Crisp, who gave me a promise that he would entertain him. After that to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Crisp’s where <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Clodius and his wife were. He very merry with drink. We played at cards late and so to bed. This day my Lord dined at my Lord Mayor’s [Allan], and Jasper was made drunk, which my Lord was very angry at.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-3-30" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-03-30">20th</time>. This morning I rose early and went to my house to put things in a little order against my going, which I conceive will be tomorrow (the weather still very rainy). After that to my Lord, where I found very great deal of business, he giving me all letters and papers that come to him about business, for me to give him account of when we come on shipboard. Hence with <abbr>Capt.</abbr> Isham by coach to Whitehall to the Admiralty. He and I and Chetwind, Doling and Luellin dined together at Marsh’s at Whitehall. So to the Bull Head whither <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Simons comes to us and I gave them my foy<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-326" id="noteref-326" epub:type="noteref">326</a> against my going to sea; and so we took leave one of another, they promising me to write to me to sea. Hither comes Pim’s boy, by my direction, with two monteeres<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-327" id="noteref-327" epub:type="noteref">327</a> for me to take my choice of, and I chose the saddest colour and left the other for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply. Hence by coach to London, and took a short melancholy leave of my father and mother, without having them to drink, or say anything of business one to another. And indeed I had a fear upon me I should scarce ever see my mother again, she having a great cold then upon her.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-328" id="noteref-328" epub:type="noteref">328</a> Then to Westminster, where by reason of rain and an easterly wind, the water was so high that there was boats rowed in King Street and all our yard was drowned, that one could not go to my house, so as no man has seen the like almost, most houses full of water.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-329" id="noteref-329" epub:type="noteref">329</a> Then back by coach to my Lord’s; where I met <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply, who stayed with me waiting for my Lord’s coming in till very late. Then he and I, and William Howe went with our swords to bring my Lord home from Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Wright’s. He resolved to go tomorrow if the wind ceased. Sheply and I home by coach. I to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Crisp’s, who had sat over a good supper long looking for me. So we sat talking and laughing till it was very late, and so Laud and I to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-3-31" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-03-31">21st</time>. To my Lord’s, but the wind very high against us, and the weather bad we could not go today; here I did very much business, and then to my Lord Widdrington’s from my Lord, with his desire that he might have the disposal of the writs of the Cinque Ports. My Lord was very civil to me, and called for wine, and writ a long letter in answer. Thence I went to a tavern over against <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierce’s with judge Advocate Fowler and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Burr, and sat and drank with them two or three pints of wine. After that to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s again and gave my Lord an account of what I had done, and so about my business to take leave of my father and mother, which by a mistake I have put down yesterday. Thence to Westminster to Crisp’s, where we were very merry; the old woman sent for a supper for me, and gave me a handkercher with strawberry buttons on it, and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-4-1" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-04-01">22nd</time>. Up very early and set things in order at my house, and so took leave of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Crispe and her daughter (who was in bed) and of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hunt. Then to my Lord’s lodging at the gate and did so there, where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hawly came to me and I gave him the key of my house to keep, and he went with me to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crew’s, and there I took my last leave of him. But the weather continuing very bad my Lord would not go today. My Lord spent this morning private in sealing of his last will and testament with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Mountagu.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-330" id="noteref-330" epub:type="noteref">330</a> After that I went forth about my own business to buy a pair of riding grey serge stockings and sword and belt and hose, and after that took Wotton and Brigden to the Pope’s Head Tavern<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-331" id="noteref-331" epub:type="noteref">331</a> in Chancery Lane, where <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Gilb.</abbr> Holland and Shelston were, and we dined and drank a great deal of wine, and they paid all. Strange how these people do now promise me anything; one a rapier, the other a vessel of wine or a gun, and one offered me his silver hatband to do him a courtesy. I pray God to keep me from being proud or too much lifted up hereby. After that to Westminster, and took leave of Kate Sterpin who was very sorry to part with me, and after that of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> George Mountagu, and received my warrant of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blackburne, to be Secretary to the two Generals of the Fleet. Then to take my leave of the Clerks of the Council, and thence Doling and Luellin would have me go with them to Mount’s chamber, where we sat and talked and then I went away. So to my Lord (in my way meeting Chetwind and Swan and bade them farewell) where I lay all night with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Andrews. This day <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply went away on board and I sent my boy with him. This day also <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jemimah went to Marrowbone,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-332" id="noteref-332" epub:type="noteref">332</a> so I could not see her. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore being out of town tonight I could not take leave of him nor speak to him about business which troubled me much. I left my small case therefore with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Andrews for him.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-4-2" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-04-02">23rd</time>. Up early, carried my Lord’s will in a black box to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> William Montagu for him to keep for him. Then to the barber’s and put on my cravat there. So to my Lord again, who was almost ready to be gone and had stayed for me. Hither came <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Gilb.</abbr> Holland, and brought me a stick rapier and Shelston a sugar-loaf, and had brought his wife who he said was a very pretty woman to the Ship tavern hard by for me to see but I could not go. Young Reeve also brought me a little perspective glass which I bought for my Lord, it cost me 8<abbr>s.</abbr> So after that my Lord in Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Wright’s coach with Captain Isham,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-333" id="noteref-333" epub:type="noteref">333</a> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thomas, John Crew, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Howe, and I in a Hackney to the Tower, where the barges stayed for us; my Lord and the Captain in one, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Howe and I, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, in the other, to the Long Reach,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-334" id="noteref-334" epub:type="noteref">334</a> where the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Swiftsure</i> lay at anchor; (in our way we saw the great breach which the late high water had made, to the loss of many £1,000 to the people about Limehouse.) Soon as my Lord on board, the guns went off bravely from the ships. And a little while after comes the Vice-Admiral Lawson,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-335" id="noteref-335" epub:type="noteref">335</a> and seemed very respectful to my Lord, and so did the rest of the Commanders of the frigates that were thereabouts. I to the cabin allotted for me, which was the best that any had that belonged to my Lord. I got out some things out of my chest for writing and to work presently, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Burr and I both. I supped at the deck table with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply. We were late writing of orders for the getting of ships ready, <abbr>etc.</abbr>; and also making of others to all the seaports between Hastings and Yarmouth, to stop all dangerous persons that are going or coming between Flanders and there. After that to bed in my cabin, which was but short; however I made shift with it and slept very well, and the weather being good I was not sick at all yet, I know not what I shall be.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-4-3" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-04-03">24th</time>. At work hard all the day writing letters to the Council, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> This day <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed came on board and dined very boldly with my Lord, but he could not get a bed there. At night <abbr>Capt.</abbr> Isham who had been at Gravesend all last night and today came and brought <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lucy (one acquainted with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Pierce, with whom I had been at her house), I drank with him in the Captain’s cabin, but my business could not stay with him. I despatch many letters today abroad and it was late before we could get to bed. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply and Howe supped with me in my cabin. The boy Eliezer flung down a can of beer upon my papers which made me give him a box of the ear, it having all spoiled my papers and cost me a great deal of work. So to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-4-4" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-04-04">25th</time>. (Lord’s day). About two o’clock in the morning, letters came from London by our coxon, so they waked me, but I would not rise but bid him stay till morning, which he did, and then I rose and carried them in to my Lord, who read them abed. Among the rest, there was the writ and mandate for him to dispose to the Cinque Ports for choice of Parliament-men. There was also one for me from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blackburne, who with his own hand superscribes it to <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">S. P.</abbr> <abbr>Esq.</abbr>, of which God knows I was not a little proud. After that I wrote a letter to the Clerk of Dover Castle, to come to my Lord about issuing of those writs. About ten o’clock <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ibbott,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-336" id="noteref-336" epub:type="noteref">336</a> at the end of the long table, begun to pray and preach and indeed made a very good sermon, upon the duty of all Christians to be steadfast in faith. After that Captain Cuttance<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-337" id="noteref-337" epub:type="noteref">337</a> and I had oysters, my Lord being in his cabin not intending to stir out today. After that up into the great cabin above to dinner with the Captain, where was Captain Isham and all the officers of the ship. I took place of all but the Captains; after dinner I wrote a great many letters to my friends at London. After that, sermon again, at which I slept, God forgive me! After that, it being a fair day, I walked with the Captain upon the deck talking. At night I supped with him and after that had orders from my Lord about some business to be done against tomorrow, which I sat up late and did and then to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-4-5" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-04-05">26th</time>. This day it is two years since it pleased God that I was cut of the stone at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Turner’s in Salisbury Court. And did resolve while I live to keep it a festival, as I did the last year at my house, and forever to have <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Turner and her company with me. But now it pleases God that I am where I am and so prevented to do it openly; only within my soul I can and do rejoice, and bless God, being at this time blessed be his holy name, in as good health as ever I was in my life. This morning I rose early, and went about making of an establishment of the whole Fleet, and a list of all the ships, with the number of men and guns. About an hour after that, we had a meeting of the principal commanders and seamen, to proportion out the number of these things. After that to dinner, there being very many commanders on board. All the afternoon very many orders were made, till I was very weary. At night <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Howe came and brought some bottles of wine and some things to eat in my cabin, where we were very merry, remembering the day of being cut for the stone. Captain Cuttance came afterwards and sat drinking a bottle of wine till eleven, a kindness he do not usually do the greatest officer in the ship. After that to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-4-6" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-04-06">27th</time>. Early in the morning at making a fair new establishment of the Fleet to send to the Council. This morning, the wind came about, and we fell into the Hope<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-338" id="noteref-338" epub:type="noteref">338</a> and in our passing by the Vice-Admiral, he and the rest of the frigates, with him, did give us abundance of guns and we them, so much that the report of them broke all the windows in my cabin and broke off the iron bar that was upon it to keep anybody from creeping in at the Scuttle.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-339" id="noteref-339" epub:type="noteref">339</a> This noon I sat the first time with my Lord at table since my coming to sea. All the afternoon exceeding busy in writing of letters and orders. In the afternoon, Sir Harry Wright came onboard us, about his business of being chosen Parliament-man. My Lord brought him to see my cabin, when I was hard a-writing. At night supped with my Lord too, with the Captain, and after that to work again till it be very late. So to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-4-7" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-04-07">28th</time>. This morning and the whole day busy, and that the more because <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Burr was about his own business all the day at Gravesend. At night there was a gentleman very well bred, his name was Banes, going for Flushing, who spoke French and Latin very well, brought by direction from Captain Clerke<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-340" id="noteref-340" epub:type="noteref">340</a> hither, as a prisoner, because he called out of the vessel that he went in, “Where is your King, we have done our business, <i xml:lang="fr">Vive le Roi</i>.” He confessed himself a Cavalier in his heart, and that he and his whole family had fought for the King; but that he was then drunk, having been all night taking his leave at Gravesend the night before, and so could not remember what it was that he said; but in his words and carriage showed much of a gentleman. My Lord had a great kindness for him, but did not think it safe to release him, but commanded him to be used civilly, so he was taken to the Master’s Cabin and had supper there. In the meantime I wrote a letter to the Council about him, and an order for the vessel to be sent for back that he was taken out of. But a while after, he sent a letter down to my Lord, which my Lord did like very well, and did advise with me what was best to be done. So I put in something to my Lord and then to the Captain that the gentleman was to be released and the letter stopped, which was done. So I went up and sat and talked with him in Latin and French, and drank a bottle or two with him; and about eleven at night he took boat again, and so God bless him. Thence I to my cabin and to bed. This day we had news of the election at Huntingdon for Bernard and Pedly,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-341" id="noteref-341" epub:type="noteref">341</a> at which my Lord was much troubled for his friends’ missing of it.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-4-8" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-04-08">29th</time>. We lie still a little below Gravesend. At night <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply returned from London, and told us of several elections for the next Parliament. That the King’s effigies was new making to be set up in the Exchange again. This evening was a great whispering of some of the Vice-Admiral’s captains that they were dissatisfied, and did intend to fight themselves, to oppose the General. But it was soon hushed, and the Vice-Admiral did wholly deny any such thing, and protested to stand by the General. At night <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Howe, and I supped in my cabin. So up to the Master’s cabin, where we sat talking, and then to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-4-9" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-04-09">30th</time>. I was saluted in the morning with two letters, from some that I had done a favour to, which brought me in each a piece of gold. This day, while my Lord and we were at dinner, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nazeby</i> came in sight towards us, and at last came to anchor close by us. After dinner my Lord and many others went on board her, where everything was out of order, and a new chimney made for my Lord in his bedchamber, which he was much pleased with. My Lord, in his discourse, discovered a great deal of love to this ship.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-342" id="noteref-342" epub:type="noteref">342</a></p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1660-4-10" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1660-04-10">31st</time>. This morning Captain Jowles of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Wexford</i> came on board, for whom I got commission from my Lord to be commander of the ship. Upon the doing thereof he was to make the 20<abbr>s.</abbr> piece that he sent me yesterday, up £5; wherefore he sent me a bill that he did owe me £4, which I sent my boy to Gravesend with him, and he did give the boy £4 for me, and the boy gave him the bill under his hand. This morning, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hill<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-343" id="noteref-343" epub:type="noteref">343</a> that lives in Axe-yard was here on board with the Vice-Admiral. I did give him a bottle of wine, and was exceedingly satisfied of the power that I have to make my friends welcome. Many orders to make all the afternoon. At night <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sheply, Howe, Ibbott, and I supped in my cabin together.</p>
			</article>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
