<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>October 1668</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-106" epub:type="chapter z3998:diary">
			<h2 epub:type="title">October 1668</h2>
			<article id="entry-1668-10-21" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-10-21">October 11th (Lord’s day)</time>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4257" id="noteref-4257" epub:type="noteref">4257</a> Up and to church, where I find Parson Mills come to town and preached, and the church full, most people being now come home to town, though the season of year is as good as summer in all respects. At noon dined at home with my wife, all alone, and busy all the afternoon in my closet, making up some papers with <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Hewer and at night comes <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turner and his wife, and there they tell me that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harper<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4258" id="noteref-4258" epub:type="noteref">4258</a> is dead at Deptford, and so now all his and my care is, how to secure his being Storekeeper in his stead; and here they and their daughter, and a kinswoman that come along with them, did sup with me, and pretty merry, and then, they gone, and my wife to read to me, and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-10-22" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-10-22">12th</time>. Up, and with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turner by water to Whitehall, there to think to enquire when the Duke of York will be in town, in order to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turner’s going down to Audley End,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4259" id="noteref-4259" epub:type="noteref">4259</a> about his place; and here I met in <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s Park with one that told us that the Duke of York would be in town tomorrow, and so Turner parted and went home, and I also did stop my intentions of going to the Court, also this day, about securing <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turner’s place of Petty-purveyor to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hater. So I to my Lord Brouncker’s, thinking to have gone and spoke to him about it, but he is gone out to town till night, and so, meeting a gentleman of my Lord Middleton’s looking for me about the payment of the £1,000 lately ordered to his Lord, in advance of his pay, which shall arise upon his going Governor to Tangier, I did go to his Lord’s lodgings, and there spoke the first time with him, and find him a shrewd man, but a drinking man, I think, as the world says; but a man that hath seen much of the world, and is a Scot. I offered him my service, though I can do him little; but he sends his man home with me, where I made him stay, till I had gone to Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen, to bespeak him about <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hater, who, contrary to my fears, did appear very friendly, to my great content; for I was afraid of his appearing for his man Burroughs. But he did not; but did declare to me afterwards his intentions to desire an excuse in his own business, to be eased of the business of the Comptroller, his health not giving him power to stay always in town, but he must go into the country. I did say little to him but compliment, having no leisure to think of his business, or any man’s but my own, and so away and home, where I find Sir <abbr class="name">H.</abbr> Cholmly come to town; and is come hither to see me: and he is a man that I love mightily, as being, of a gentleman, the most industrious that ever I saw. He stayed with me awhile talking, and telling me his obligations to my Lord Sandwich, which I was glad of; and that the Duke of Buckingham is now chief of all men in this kingdom, which I knew before; and that he do think the Parliament will hardly ever meet again; which is a great many men’s thoughts, and I shall not be sorry for it. He being gone, I with my Lord Middleton’s servant to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Colvill’s, but he was not in town, and so he parted, and I home, and there to dinner, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pelling with us; and thence my wife and Mercer, and <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Hewer and <abbr class="name">Deb.</abbr>, to the King’s playhouse, and I afterwards by water with them, and there we did hear the Eunuch (who, it seems, is a Frenchman, but long bred in Italy) sing, which I seemed to take as new to me, though I saw him on Saturday last, but said nothing of it; but such action and singing I could never have imagined to have heard, and do make good whatever Tom Hill used to tell me. Here we met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Batelier and his sister, and so they home with us in two coaches, and there at my house stayed and supped, and this night my bookseller Shrewsbury comes, and brings my books of Martyrs, and I did pay him for them, and did this night make the young women before supper to open all the volumes for me. So to supper, and after supper to read a ridiculous nonsensical book set out by <abbr class="name">Will.</abbr> Pen,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4260" id="noteref-4260" epub:type="noteref">4260</a> for the Quakers; but so full of nothing but nonsense, that I was ashamed to read in it. So they gone, we to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-10-23" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-10-23">13th</time>. Up, and to the office, and before the office did speak with my Lord Brouncker, and there did get his ready assent to <abbr class="name">T.</abbr> Hater’s having of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turner’s place, and so Sir <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Minnes’s also: but when we come to sit down at the Board, comes to us <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wren this day to town, and tells me that James Southern do petition the Duke of York for the Storekeeper’s place of Deptford, which did trouble me much, and also the Board, though, upon discourse, after he was gone, we did resolve to move hard for our Clerks, and that places of preferment may go according to seniority and merit. So, the Board up, I home with my people to dinner, and so to the office again, and there, after doing some business, I with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turner to the Duke of Albemarle’s at night; and there did speak to him about his appearing to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wren a friend to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turner, which he did take kindly from me; and so away thence, well pleased with what we had now done, and so I with him home, stopping at my Lord Brouncker’s, and getting his hand to a letter I wrote to the Duke of York for <abbr class="name">T.</abbr> Hater, and also at my Lord Middleton’s, to give him an account of what I had done this day, with his man, at Alderman Backewell’s, about the getting of his £1,000 paid;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4261" id="noteref-4261" epub:type="noteref">4261</a> and here he did take occasion to discourse about the business of the Dutch war, which, he says, he was always an enemy to; and did discourse very well of it, I saying little, but pleased to hear him talk; and to see how some men may by age come to know much, and yet by their drinking and other pleasures render themselves not very considerable. I did this day find by discourse with somebody, that this nobleman was the great Major-General Middleton, that was of the Scots army, in the beginning of the late war against the King. Thence home and to the office to finish my letters, and so home and did get my wife to read to me, and then <abbr class="name">Deb.</abbr> to comb my head.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-10-24" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-10-24">14th</time>. Up, and by water, stopping at Michell’s, and there saw Betty, but could have no discourse with her, but there drank. To Whitehall, and there walked to <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s, where I find the Court mighty full, it being the Duke of York’s birthday; and he mighty fine, and all the musick, one after another, to my great content. Here I met with Sir <abbr class="name">H.</abbr> Cholmly; and he and I to walk, and to my Lord Barkeley’s new house,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4262" id="noteref-4262" epub:type="noteref">4262</a> there to see a new experiment of a cart, which, by having two little wheeles fastened to the axletree, is said to make it go with half the ease and more, than another cart but we did not see the trial made. Thence I home, and after dinner to <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s, and there met my brethren; but the Duke of York being gone out, and tonight being a play there, and a great festival, we would not stay, but went all of us to the King’s playhouse, and there saw <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Faythful Shepherdess</i> again, that we might hear the French Eunuch sing, which we did, to our great content; though I do admire his action as much as his singing, being both beyond all I ever saw or heard. Thence with <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen home, and there to get my people to read, and to supper, and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-10-25" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-10-25">15th</time>. Up, and all the morning at the office, and at home at dinner, where, after dinner, my wife and I and <abbr class="name">Deb.</abbr> out by coach to the upholsters in Long Lane, Alderman Reeve’s, and then to Alderman Crow’s, to see variety of hangings, and were mightily pleased therewith, and spent the whole afternoon thereupon; and at last I think we shall pitch upon the best suit of Apostles, where three pieces for my room will come to almost £80: so home, and to my office, and then home to supper and to bed. This day at the Board comes unexpected the warrants from the Duke of York for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turner and Hater, for the places they desire, which contents me mightily.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-10-26" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-10-26">16th</time>. Up, and busy all the morning at the office, and before noon I took my wife by coach, and <abbr class="name">Deb.</abbr>, and showed her <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wren’s hangings and bed, at <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s, and Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Coventry’s in the Pell Mell, for our satisfaction in what we are going to buy; and so by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crow’s, home, about his hangings, and do pitch upon buying his second suit of Apostles⁠—the whole suit, which comes to £83; and this we think the best for us, having now the whole suit, to answer any other rooms or service. So home to dinner, and with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hater by water to <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s: there <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hater, to give <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wren thanks for his kindness about his place that he hath lately granted him, of Petty Purveyor of petty emptions, upon the removal of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turner to be Storekeeper at Deptford, on the death of Harper. And then we all up to the Duke of York, and there did our usual business, and so I with <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Minnes home, and there finding my wife gone to my aunt Wight’s, to see her the first time after her coming to town, and indeed the first time, I think, these two years (we having been great strangers one to the other for a great while), I to them; and there mighty kindly used, and had a barrel of oysters, and so to look up and down their house, they having hung a room since I was there, but with hangings not fit to be seen with mine, which I find all come home tonight, and here staying an hour or two we home, and there to supper and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-10-27" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-10-27">17th</time>. Up, and to the office, where all the morning sitting, and at noon home to dinner, and to the office all the afternoon, and then late home, and there with much pleasure getting <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gibbs, that writes well, to write the name upon my new draught of <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">The Resolution</i>; and so set it up, and altered the situation of some of my pictures in my closet, to my extraordinary content, and at it with much pleasure till almost 12 at night. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore and Seymour were with me this afternoon, who tell me that my Lord Sandwich was received mighty kindly by the King, and is in exceeding great esteem with him, and the rest about him; but I doubt it will be hard for him to please both the King and the Duke of York, which I shall be sorry for. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore tells me the sad condition my Lord is in, in his estate and debts; and the way he now lives in, so high, and so many vain servants about him, that he must be ruined, if he do not take up, which, by the grace of God, I will put him upon, when I come to see him.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-10-28" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-10-28">18th (Lord’s day)</time>. Up, and with my boy Tom all the morning altering the places of my pictures with great pleasure, and at noon to dinner, and then comes <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shales to see me, and I with him to recommend him to my Lord Brouncker’s service, which I did at Madam Williams’s, and my Lord receives him. Thence with Brouncker to Lincolne’s Inn, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ball, to visit <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Wilkins, now newly Bishop of Chester: and he received us mighty kindly; and had most excellent discourse from him about his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Book of Reall Character</i>:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4263" id="noteref-4263" epub:type="noteref">4263</a> and so I with Lord Brouncker to Whitehall, and there saw the Queen and some ladies, and with Lord Brouncker back, it again being a rainy evening, and so my Lord forced to lend me his coach till I got a hackney, which I did, and so home and to supper, and got my wife to read to me, and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-10-29" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-10-29">19th</time>. Up, and to my office to set down my Journall for some days past, and so to other business. At the office all the morning upon some business of Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Warren’s, and at noon home to dinner, and thence out by coach with my wife and <abbr class="name">Deb.</abbr> and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Harman, the upholster, and carried them to take measure of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wren’s bed at <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s, I being resolved to have just such another made me, and thence set him down in the Strand, and my wife and I to the Duke of York’s playhouse; and there saw, the first time acted, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Queen of Arragon</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4264" id="noteref-4264" epub:type="noteref">4264</a> an old Blackfriars play, but an admirable one, so good that I am astonished at it, and wonder where it hath lain asleep all this while, that I have never heard of it before. Here met <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batelier and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hunt, <abbr class="name">Deb.</abbr>’s aunt; and saw her home⁠—a very witty woman, and one that knows this play, and understands a play mighty well. Left her at home in Jewen Street, and we home, and to supper, and my wife to read to me, and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-10-30" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-10-30">20th</time>. Up, and to the office all the morning, and then home to dinner, having this day a new girl come to us in the room of Nell, who is lately, about four days since, gone away, being grown lazy and proud. This girl to stay only till we have a boy, which I intend to keep when I have a coach, which I am now about. At this time my wife and I mighty busy laying out money in dressing up our best chamber, and thinking of a coach and coachman and horses, <abbr>etc.</abbr>; and the more because of Creed’s being now married to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Pickering; a thing I could never have expected, but it is done about seven or ten days since, as I hear out of the country. At noon home to dinner, and my wife and Harman and girl abroad to buy things, and I walked out to several places to pay debts, and among other things to look out for a coach, and saw many; and did light on one<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4265" id="noteref-4265" epub:type="noteref">4265</a> for which I bid £50, which do please me mightily, and I believe I shall have it. So to my tailor’s, and the New Exchange, and so by coach home, and there, having this day bought <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Queen of Arragon</i> play, I did get my wife and <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batelier to read it over this night by 11 o’clock, and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-10-31" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-10-31">21st</time>. Lay pretty long talking with content with my wife about our coach and things, and so to the office, where Sir <abbr class="name">D.</abbr> Gawden was to do something in his accounts. At noon to dinner to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Batelier’s, his mother coming this day a-housewarming to him, and several friends of his, to which he invited us. Here mighty merry, and his mother the same; I heretofore took her for a gentlewoman, and understanding. I rose from table before the rest, because under an obligation to go to my Lord Brouncker’s, where to meet several gentlemen of the Royal Society, to go and make a visit to the French Embassador Colbert, at Leicester House,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4266" id="noteref-4266" epub:type="noteref">4266</a> he having endeavoured to make one or two to my Lord Brouncker, as our President, but he was not within, but I come too late, they being gone before: but I followed to Leicester House;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4267" id="noteref-4267" epub:type="noteref">4267</a> but they are gone in and up before me; and so I away to the New Exchange, and there stayed for my wife, and she come, we to Cow Lane, and there I showed her the coach which I pitch on, and she is out of herself for joy almost. But the man not within, so did nothing more towards an agreement, but to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Crow’s about a bed, to have his advice, and so home, and there had my wife to read to me, and so to supper and to bed. <em>Memorandum:</em> that from Crow’s, we went back to Charing Cross, and there left my people at their tailor’s, while I to my Lord Sandwich’s lodgings, who come to town the last night, and is come thither to lye: and met with him within: and among others my new cousin Creed, who looks mighty soberly; and he and I saluted one another with mighty gravity, till we come to a little more freedom of talk about it. But here I hear that Sir Gilbert Pickering is lately dead, about three days since, which makes some sorrow there, though not much, because of his being long expected to die, having been in a lethargy long. So waited on my Lord to Court, and there stayed and saw the ladies awhile: and thence to my wife, and took them up; and so home, and to supper and bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-11-1" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-11-01">22nd</time>. Up, and <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batelier’s Frenchman, a perriwigg maker, comes and brings me a new one, which I liked and paid him for: a mighty genteel fellow. So to the office, where sat all the morning, and at noon home to dinner, and thence with wife and <abbr class="name">Deb.</abbr> to Crow’s, and there did see some more beds; and we shall, I think, pitch upon a camlott one, when all is done. Thence sent them home, and I to Arundell House, where the first time we<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4268" id="noteref-4268" epub:type="noteref">4268</a> have met since the vacation, and not much company: but here much good discourse, and afterwards my Lord and others and I to the Devil tavern,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4269" id="noteref-4269" epub:type="noteref">4269</a> and there eat and drank, and so late, with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Colwell, home by coach; and at home took him with me, and there found my uncle Wight and aunt, and Woolly and his wife, and there supped, and mighty merry. And anon they gone, and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Turner stayed, who was there also to talk of her husband’s business; and the truth is, I was the less pleased to talk with her, for that she hath not yet owned, in any fit manner of thanks, my late and principal service to her husband about his place, which I alone ought to have the thanks for, if they know as much as I do; but let it go: if they do not own it, I shall have it in my hand to teach them to do it. So to bed. This day word come for all the Principal Officers to bring them [the Commissioners of Accounts] their patents, which I did in the afternoon, by leaving it at their office, but am troubled at what should be their design therein.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-11-2" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-11-02">23rd</time>. Up, and plasterers at work and painters about my house. Commissioner Middleton and I to <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s, where with the rest of our company we attended on our usual business the Duke of York. Thence I to Whitehall, to my Lord Sandwich’s, where I find my Lord within, but busy, private; and so I stayed a little talking with the young gentlemen: and so away with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierce, the surgeon, towards Tyburne, to see the people executed; but come too late, it being done; two men and a woman hanged,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4270" id="noteref-4270" epub:type="noteref">4270</a> and so back again and to my coachmaker’s, and there did come a little nearer agreement for the coach, and so to Duck Lane, and there my bookseller’s, and saw his <i xml:lang="es">moher</i>, but <i xml:lang="fr">elle</i> is so big-bellied that <i xml:lang="fr">elle</i> is not worth seeing. So home, and there all alone to dinner, my wife and <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Hewer being gone to Deptford to see her mother, and so I to the office all the afternoon. In the afternoon comes my cousin, Sidney Pickering,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4271" id="noteref-4271" epub:type="noteref">4271</a> to bring my wife and me his sister’s Favour for her wedding, which is kindly done, and he gone, I to business again, and in the evening home, made my wife read till supper time, and so to bed. This day Pierce do tell me, among other news, the late frolick and debauchery of Sir Charles Sidly and Buckhurst, running up and down all the night with their arses bare, through the streets; and at last fighting, and being beat by the watch and clapped up all night; and how the King takes their parts; and my Lord Chief Justice Keeling hath laid the constable by the heels<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4272" id="noteref-4272" epub:type="noteref">4272</a> to answer it next Sessions: which is a horrid shame. How the King and these gentlemen did make the fiddlers of Thetford, this last progress, to sing them all the bawdy songs they could think of. How Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Coventry was brought the other day to the Duchesse of York by the Duke, to kiss her hand; who did acknowledge his unhappiness to occasion her so much sorrow, declaring his intentions in it, and praying her pardon; which she did give him upon his promise to make good his pretences of innocence to her family, by his faithfulness to his master, the Duke of York. That the Duke of Buckingham is now all in all, and will ruin Coventry, if he can: and that <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Coventry do now rest wholly upon the Duke of York for his standing, which is a great turn. He tells me that my Lady Castlemayne, however, is a mortal enemy to the Duke of Buckingham, which I understand not; but, it seems, she is disgusted with his greatness, and his ill usage of her. That the King was drunk at Saxam<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4273" id="noteref-4273" epub:type="noteref">4273</a> with Sidly, Buckhurst, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, the night that my Lord Arlington come thither, and would not give him audience, or could not which is true, for it was the night that I was there, and saw the King go up to his chamber, and was told that the King had been drinking. He tells me, too, that the Duke of York did the next day chide <abbr class="name">Bab.</abbr> May for his occasioning the King’s giving himself up to these gentlemen, to the neglecting of my Lord Arlington: to which he answered merrily, that, by God, there was no man in England that had heads to lose, durst do what they do, every day, with the King, and asked the Duke of York’s pardon: which is a sign of a mad world. God bless us out of it!</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-11-3" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-11-03">24th</time>. This morning comes to me the coachmaker,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4274" id="noteref-4274" epub:type="noteref">4274</a> and agreed with me for £53, and stand to the courtesy of what more I should give him upon the finishing of the coach:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4275" id="noteref-4275" epub:type="noteref">4275</a> he is likely also to fit me with a coachman. There comes also to me <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shotgrave, the operator of our Royal Society, to show me his method of making the Tubes for the eyes, which are clouterly done, so that mine are better, but I have well informed myself in several things from him, and so am glad of speaking with him. So to the office, where all the morning, and then to dinner, and so all the afternoon late at the office, and so home; and my wife to read to me, and then with much content to bed. This day Lord Brouncker tells me that the making Sir <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Minnes a bare Commissioner<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4276" id="noteref-4276" epub:type="noteref">4276</a> is now in doing, which I am glad of; but he speaks of two new Commissioners, which I do not believe.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-11-4" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-11-04">25th (Lord’s day)</time>. Up, and discoursing with my wife about our house and many new things we are doing of, and so to church I, and there find Jack Fenn come, and his wife, a pretty black woman: I never saw her before, nor took notice of her now. So home and to dinner, and after dinner all the afternoon got my wife and boy to read to me, and at night <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batelier comes and sups with us; and, after supper, to have my head combed by <abbr class="name">Deb.</abbr>, which occasioned the greatest sorrow to me that ever I knew in this world, for my wife, coming up suddenly, did find me embracing the girl.⁠ ⁠… I was at a wonderful loss upon it, and the girle also, and I endeavoured to put it off, but my wife was struck mute and grew angry, and so her voice come to her, grew quite out of order, and I to say little, but to bed, and my wife said little also, but could not sleep all night, but about two in the morning waked me and cried, and fell to tell me as a great secret that she was a Roman Catholique and had received the Holy Sacrament, which troubled me, but I took no notice of it, but she went on from one thing to another till at last it appeared plainly her trouble was at what she saw, but yet I did not know how much she saw, and therefore said nothing to her. But after her much crying and reproaching me with inconstancy and preferring a sorry girl before her, I did give her no provocation, but did promise all fair usage to her and love, and foreswore any hurt that I did with her, till at last she seemed to be at ease again, and so toward morning a little sleep, and so I with some little repose and rest</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-11-5" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-11-05">26th</time>. Rose, and up and by water to Whitehall, but with my mind mightily troubled for the poor girle, whom I fear I have undone by this, my [wife] telling me that she would turn her out of doors. However, I was obliged to attend the Duke of York, thinking to have had a meeting of Tangier today, but had not; but he did take me and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wren into his closet, and there did press me to prepare what I had to say upon the answers of my fellow-officers to his great letter, which I promised to do against his coming to town again, the next week; and so to other discourse, finding plainly that he is in trouble, and apprehensions of the Reformers, and would be found to do what he can towards reforming, himself. And so thence to my Lord Sandwich’s, where, after long stay, he being in talk with others privately, I to him; and there he, taking physic and keeping his chamber, I had an hour’s talk with him about the ill posture of things at this time, while the King gives countenance to Sir Charles Sidly and Lord Buckhurst, telling him their late story of running up and down the streets a little while since all night, and their being beaten and clapped up all night by the constable, who is since chid and imprisoned for his pains. He tells me that he thinks his matters do stand well with the King, and hopes to have dispatch to his mind; but I doubt it, and do see that he do fear it, too. He told me my Lady Carteret’s trouble about my writing of that letter of the Duke of York’s lately to the Office, which I did not own, but declared to be of no injury to <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Carteret, and that I would write a letter to him to satisfy him therein. But this I am in pain how to do, without doing myself wrong, and the end I had, of preparing a justification to myself hereafter, when the faults of the Navy come to be found out however, I will do it in the best manner I can. Thence by coach home and to dinner, finding my wife mightily discontented, and the girle sad, and no words from my wife to her. So after dinner they out with me about two or three things, and so home again, I all the evening busy, and my wife full of trouble in her looks, and anon to bed, where about midnight she wakes me, and there falls foul of me again, affirming that she saw me hug and kiss the girle; the latter I denied, and truly, the other I confessed and no more, and upon her pressing me did offer to give her under my hand that I would never see <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Pierce more nor Knepp, but did promise her particular demonstrations of my true love to her, owning some indiscretions in what I did, but that there was no harm in it. She at last upon these promises was quiet, and very kind we were, and so to sleep, and</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-11-6" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-11-06">27th</time>. In the morning up, but my mind troubled for the poor girle, with whom I could not get opportunity to speak, but to the office, my mind mighty full of sorrow for her, to the office, where all the morning, and to dinner with my people, and to the office all the afternoon, and so at night home, and there busy to get some things ready against tomorrow’s meeting of Tangier, and that being done, and my clerks gone, my wife did towards bedtime begin to be in a mighty rage from some new matter that she had got in her head, and did most part of the night in bed rant at me in most high terms of threats of publishing my shame, and when I offered to rise would have rose too, and caused a candle to be light to burn by her all night in the chimney while she ranted, while the knowing myself to have given some grounds for it, did make it my business to appease her all I could possibly, and by good words and fair promises did make her very quiet, and so rested all night, and rose with perfect good peace, being heartily afflicted for this folly of mine that did occasion it, but was forced to be silent about the girle, which I have no mind to part with, but much less that the poor girle should be undone by my folly. So up with mighty kindness from my wife and a thorough peace, and being up did by a note advise the girle what I had done and owned, which note I was in pain for till she told me she had burned it. This evening <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Spong come, and sat late with me, and first told me of the instrument called parallelogram,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4277" id="noteref-4277" epub:type="noteref">4277</a> which I must have one of, showing me his practice thereon, by a map of England.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-11-7" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-11-07">28th</time>. So by coach with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gibson to Chancery Lane, and there made oath before a Master of Chancery to the Tangier account of fees, and so to Whitehall, where, by and by, a Committee met, my Lord Sandwich there, but his report was not received, it being late; but only a little business done, about the supplying the place with victuals. But I did get, to my great content, my account allowed of fees, with great applause by my Lord Ashly and Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen. Thence home, calling at one or two places; and there about our workmen, who are at work upon my wife’s closet, and other parts of my house, that we are all in dirt. So after dinner with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gibson all the afternoon in my closet, and at night to supper and to bed, my wife and I at good peace, but yet with some little grudgings of trouble in her and more in me about the poor girle.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-11-8" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-11-08">29th</time>. At the office all the morning, where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wren first tells us of the order from the King, came last night to the Duke of York, for signifying his pleasure to the Sollicitor-General for drawing up a Commission for suspending of my Lord Anglesey,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4278" id="noteref-4278" epub:type="noteref">4278</a> and putting in Sir Thomas Littleton and Sir Thomas Osborne, the former a creature of Arlington’s, and the latter of the Duke of Buckingham’s, during the suspension.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4279" id="noteref-4279" epub:type="noteref">4279</a> The Duke of York was forced to obey, and did grant it, he being to go to Newmarket this day with the King, and so the King pressed for it. But <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wren do own that the Duke of York is the most wounded in this, in the world, for it is done and concluded without his privity, after his appearing for Lord Anglesey, and that it is plain that they do ayme to bring the Admiralty into Commission too, and lessen the Duke of York. This do put strange apprehensions into all our Board; only I think I am the least troubled at it, for I care not at all for it: but my Lord Brouncker and Pen do seem to think much of it. So home to dinner, full of this news, and after dinner to the office, and so home all the afternoon to do business towards my drawing up an account for the Duke of York of the answers of this office to his late great letter, and late at it, and so to bed, with great peace from my wife and quiet, I bless God.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-11-9" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-11-09">30th</time>. Up betimes; and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Povy comes to even accounts with me, which we did, and then fell to other talk. He tells, in short, how the King is made a child of, by Buckingham and Arlington, to the lessening of the Duke of York, whom they cannot suffer to be great, for fear of my Lord Chancellor’s return, which, therefore, they make the King violent against. That he believes it is impossible these two great men can hold together long: or, at least, that the ambition of the former is so great, that he will endeavour to master all, and bring into play as many as he can. That Anglesey will not lose his place easily, but will contend in law with whoever comes to execute it. That the Duke of York, in all things but in his codpiece, is led by the nose by his wife. That <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Coventry is now, by the Duke of York, made friends with the Duchess; and that he is often there, and waits on her. That he do believe that these present great men will break in time, and that <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Coventry will be a great man again; for he do labour to have nothing to do in matters of the State, and is so usefull to the side that he is on, that he will stand, though at present he is quite out of play. That my Lady Castlemayne hates the Duke of Buckingham. That the Duke of York hath expressed himself very kind to my Lord Sandwich, which I am mighty glad of. That we are to expect more changes if these men stand. This done, he and I to talk of my coach, and I got him to go see it, where he finds most infinite fault with it, both as to being out of fashion and heavy, with so good reason that I am mightily glad of his having corrected me in it; and so I do resolve to have one of his build, and with his advice, both in coach and horses, he being the fittest man in the world for it, and so he carried me home, and said the same to my wife. So I to the office and he away, and at noon I home to dinner, and all the afternoon late with Gibson at my chamber about my present great business, only a little in the afternoon at the office about Sir <abbr class="name">D.</abbr> Gawden’s accounts, and so to bed and slept heartily, my wife and I at good peace, but my heart troubled and her mind not at ease, I perceive, she against and I for the girle, to whom I have not said anything these three days, but resolve to be mighty strange in appearance to her. This night <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batelier come and took his leave of us, he setting out for France tomorrow.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1668-11-10" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1668-11-10">31st</time>. Up, and at the office all the morning. At noon home to dinner with my people, and afternoon to the office again, and then to my chamber with Gibson to do more about my great answer for the Duke of York, and so at night after supper to bed well pleased with my advance thereon. This day my Lord Anglesey was at the Office, and do seem to make nothing of this business of his suspension, resolving to bring it into the Council, where he seems not to doubt to have right, he standing upon his defence and patent, and hath put in his caveats to the several Offices: so, as soon as the King comes back again,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-4280" id="noteref-4280" epub:type="noteref">4280</a> which will be on Tuesday next, he will bring it into the Council. So ends this month with some quiet to my mind, though not perfect, after the greatest falling out with my poor wife, and through my folly with the girl, that ever I had, and I have reason to be sorry and ashamed of it, and more to be troubled for the poor girl’s sake, whom I fear I shall by this means prove the ruin of, though I shall think myself concerned both to love and be a friend to her. This day Roger Pepys and his son Talbot, newly come to town, come and dined with me, and mighty glad I am to see them.</p>
			</article>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
