<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>January 1661–62</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-25" epub:type="chapter z3998:diary">
			<h2 epub:type="title">January 1661⁠–⁠62</h2>
			<article id="entry-1662-1-11" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-01-11">January 1st</time>. Waking this morning out of my sleep on a sudden, I did with my elbow hit my wife a great blow over her face and nose, which waked her with pain, at which I was sorry, and to sleep again. Up and went forth with Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen by coach towards Westminster, and in my way seeing that the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Spanish Curate</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1281" id="noteref-1281" epub:type="noteref">1281</a> was acted today, I ’light and let him go alone, and I home again and sent to young <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pen and his sister to go anon with my wife and I to the Theatre. That done, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen came to me and he and I walked out, and to the Stacioner’s, and looked over some pictures and maps for my house, and so home again to dinner, and by and by came the two young Pens, and after we had eat a barrel of oysters we went by coach to the play, and there saw it well acted, and a good play it is, only Diego the Sexton did overdo his part too much. From thence home, and they sat with us till late at night at cards very merry, but the jest was <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen had left his sword in the coach, and so my boy and he run out after the coach, and by very great chance did at the Exchange meet with the coach and got his sword again. So to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-1-12" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-01-12">2nd</time>. An invitation sent us before we were up from my Lady Sandwich’s, to come and dine with her: so at the office all the morning, and at noon thither to dinner, where there was a good and great dinner, and the company, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> William Montagu and his Lady (but she seemed so far from the beauty that I expected her from my Lady’s talk to be, that it put me into an ill humour all the day, to find my expectation so lost), <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rumball and Townsend and their wives. After dinner, borne by water, and so to the office till night, and then I went forth, by appointment, to meet with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Grant,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1282" id="noteref-1282" epub:type="noteref">1282</a> who promised to meet me at the Coffeehouse to bring me acquainted with Cooper,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1283" id="noteref-1283" epub:type="noteref">1283</a> the great limner in little, but they deceived me, and so I went home, and there sat at my lute and singing till almost twelve at night, and so to bed. Sir <abbr class="name">Richd.</abbr> Fanshaw is come suddenly from Portugall, but nobody knows what his business is.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-1-13" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-01-13">3rd</time>. Lay long in bed, and so up and abroad to several places about petty businesses. Among others to Tom’s, who I find great hopes of that he will do well, which I am glad of, and am not now so hasty to get a wife for him as I was before. So to dinner to my Lord Crew’s with him and his Lady, and after dinner to Faithorne’s,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1284" id="noteref-1284" epub:type="noteref">1284</a> and there bought some pictures of him; and while I was there, comes by the King’s life-guard, he being gone to Lincoln’s Inn this afternoon to see the Revells there; there being, according to an old custom, a prince and all his nobles, and other matters of sport and charge.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1285" id="noteref-1285" epub:type="noteref">1285</a> So home, and up to my chamber to look over my papers and other things, my mind being much troubled for these four or five days because of my present great expense, and will be so till I cast up and see how my estate stands, and that I am loth to do for fear I have spent too much, and delay it the rather that I may pay for my pictures and my wife’s, and the book that I am buying for Paul’s School before I do cast up my accompts.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-1-14" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-01-14">4th</time>. At home most of the morning hanging up pictures, and seeing how my pewter sconces that I have bought will become my stayres and entry, and then with my wife by water to Westminster, whither she to her father’s and I to Westminster Hall, and there walked a turn or two with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Chetwin (who had a dog challenged of him by another man that said it was his, but <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Chetwin called the dog, and the dog at last would follow him, and not his old master, and so Chetwin got the dog) and <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Symons, and thence to my wife, who met me at my Lord’s lodgings, and she and I and old East to Wilkinson’s to dinner, where we had some rost beef and a mutton pie, and a mince-pie, but none of them pleased me. After dinner by coach my wife and I home, and I to the office, and there till late, and then I and my wife to Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen’s to cards and supper, and were merry, and much correspondence there has been between our two families all this Christmas. So home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-1-15" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-01-15">5th (Lord’s day)</time>. Left my wife in bed not well⁠ ⁠… and I to church, and so home to dinner, and dined alone upon some marrow bones, and had a fine piece of rost beef, but being alone I eat none. So after dinner comes in my brother Tom, and he tells me how he hath seen the father and mother of the girl which my cousin Joyces would have him to have for a wife, and they are much for it, but we are in a great quandary what to do therein, £200 being but a little money; and I hope, if he continues as he begins, he may look out for one with more. To church, and before sermon there was a long psalm, and half another sung out while the Sexton gathered what the church would give him for this last year. I gave him 3<abbr>s.</abbr>, and have the last week given the Clerk 2<abbr>s.</abbr>, which I set down that I may know what to do the next year, if it please the Lord that I live so long; but the jest was, the Clerk begins the 25th psalm, which hath a proper tune to it, and then the 116th, which cannot be sung with that tune, which seemed very ridiculous. After church to Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten’s, where on purpose I have not been this fortnight, and I am resolved to keep myself more reserved to avoyd the contempt which otherwise I must fall into, and so home and sat and talked and supped with my wife, and so up to prayers and to bed, having wrote a letter this night to Sir <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Mennes in the Downs for his opinion in the business of striking of flags.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-1-16" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-01-16">6th (Twelfth day)</time>. This morning I sent my lute to the Paynter’s, and there I stayed with him all the morning to see him paint the neck of my lute in my picture, which I was not pleased with after it was done. Thence to dinner to Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen’s, it being a solemn feast day with him, his wedding day,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1286" id="noteref-1286" epub:type="noteref">1286</a> and we had, besides a good chine of beef and other good cheer, eighteen mince pies in a dish, the number of the years that he hath been married,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1287" id="noteref-1287" epub:type="noteref">1287</a> where Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten and his Lady, and daughter was, and Colonel Treswell and Major Holmes, who I perceive would fain get to be free and friends with my wife, but I shall prevent it, and she herself hath also a defyance against him. After dinner they set in to drinking, so that I would stay no longer, but went away home, and Captain Cock, who was quite drunk, comes after me, and there sat awhile and so away, and anon I went again after the company was gone, and sat and played at cards with Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen and his children, and so after supper home, and there I hear that my man Gul<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1288" id="noteref-1288" epub:type="noteref">1288</a> was gone to bed, and upon enquiry I hear that he did vomit before he went to bed, and complained his head ached, and thereupon though he was asleep I sent for him out of his bed, and he rose and came up to me, and I appeared very angry and did tax him with being drunk, and he told me that he had been with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Southerne and Homewood at the Dolphin, and drank a quart of sack, but that his head did ache before he went out. But I do believe he has drunk too much, and so I did threaten him to bid his uncle dispose of him some other way, and sent him down to bed and do resolve to continue to be angry with him. So to bed to my wife, and told her what had passed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-1-17" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-01-17">7th</time>. Long in bed, and then rose and went along with Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen on foot to Stepny to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Chappell’s (who has the pretty boy to her son), and there met my wife and Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen’s children all, and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Poole and her boy, and there dined and were very merry, and home again by coach and so to the office. In the afternoon and at night to Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen’s, there supped and played at cards with them and were merry, the children being to go all away to school again tomorrow. Thence home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-1-18" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-01-18">8th</time>. I rose and went to Westminster Hall, and there walked up and down upon several businesses, and among others I met with Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen, who told me that he had this morning heard Sir <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Carteret extremely angry against my man Will that he is every other day with the Commissioners of Parliament at Westminster, and that his uncle was a rogue, and that he did tell his uncle everything that passes at the office, and Sir William, though he loves the lad, did advise me to part with him, which did with this surprise mightily trouble me, though I was already angry with him, and so to the Wardrobe by water, and all the way did examine Will about the business, but did not tell him upon what score, but I find that the poor lad do suspect something. To dinner with my Lady, and after dinner talked long with her, and so home, and to Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten’s, and sat and talked with him, and so home troubled in mind, and so up to my study and read the two treaties before <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Selden’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Mare Clausum</i>, and so to bed. This night come about £100 from Brampton by carrier to me, in holsters from my father, which made me laugh.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-1-19" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-01-19">9th</time>. At the office all the morning private with Sir <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Carteret (who I expected something from about yesterday’s business, but he said nothing), Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten, and Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen, about drawing up an answer to several demands of my Lord Treasurer, and late at it till 2 o’clock. Then to dinner, and my wife to Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen’s, and so to the office again and sat till late; and so home, where I found <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Armiger below talking with my wife, but being offended with him for his leaving of my brother Tom I showed him no countenance, but did take notice of it to him plainly, and I perceive he was troubled at it, but I am glad I told him of it. Then (when he was gone) up to write several letters by the post, and so to set my papers and things in order, and to bed. This morning we agreed upon some things to answer to the Duke about the practice of striking of the flags, which will now put me upon finishing my resolution of writing something upon the subject.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-1-20" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-01-20">10th</time>. To Whitehall, and there spoke with Sir Paul Neale,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1289" id="noteref-1289" epub:type="noteref">1289</a> about a mathematical request of my Lord’s to him, which I did deliver to him, and he promised to employ somebody to answer it, something about observation of the moon and stars, but what I did not mind. Here I met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore, who tells me that an injunc̃on is granted in Chancery against <abbr class="name">T.</abbr> Trice, at which I was very glad, being before in some trouble for it. With him to Westminster Hall, where I walked till noon talking with one or other, and so to the Wardrobe to dinner, where tired with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pickering’s company I returned to Westminster, by appointment, to meet my wife at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hunt’s to gossip with her, which we did alone, and were very merry, and did give her a cup and spoon for my wife’s godchild, and so home by coach, and I late reading in my chamber and then to bed, my wife being angry that I keep the house so late up.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-1-21" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-01-21">11th</time>. My brother Tom came to me, and he and I to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turner the Draper’s, and paid £15 to him for cloth owing to him by my father for his mourning for my uncle, and so to his house, and there invited all the Honiwood’s to dinner on Monday next. So to the Exchange, and there all the news is of the French and Dutch joyning against us; but I do not think it yet true. So home to dinner, and in the afternoon to the office, and so to Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten’s, where in discourse I heard the custom of the election of the Dukes of Genoa, who for two years are every day attended in the greatest state; and four or five hundred men always waiting upon him as a king; and when the two years are out, and another is chose, a messenger is, sent to him, who stands at the bottom of the stairs, and he at the top, and says, “<i xml:lang="it">V<sup>a</sup>. Illustrissima Serenita sta finita, et puede andar en casa.</i>”⁠—“Your serenity is now ended; and now you may be going home,” and so claps on his hat. And the old Duke (having by custom sent his goods home before), walks away, it may be but with one man at his heels; and the new one brought immediately in his room, in the greatest state in the world.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1290" id="noteref-1290" epub:type="noteref">1290</a> Another account was told us, how in the Dukedom of Ragusa, in the Adriatique (a State that is little, but more ancient, they say, than Venice, and is called the mother of Venice, and the Turks lie round about it), that they change all the officers of their guard, for fear of conspiracy, every twenty-four hours, so that nobody knows who shall be captain of the guard tonight; but two men come to a man, and lay hold of him as a prisoner, and carry him to the place; and there he hath the keys of the garrison given him, and he presently issues his orders for that night’s watch: and so always from night to night. Sir <abbr class="name">Wm.</abbr> Rider told the first of his own knowledge; and both he and Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten confirm the last. Hence home and to read, and so to bed, but very late again.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-1-22" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-01-22">12th (Lord’s day)</time>. To church, where a stranger made a very good sermon. At noon Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen and my good friend Dean Fuller, by appointment, and my wife’s brother by chance, dined with me very merry and handsomely. After dinner the Dean, my wife and I by Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen’s coach left us, he to Whitehall, and my wife and I to visit <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Pierce and thence <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Turner, who continues very ill still, and <abbr class="name">The.</abbr> is also fallen sick, which do trouble me for the poor mother. So home and to read, I being troubled to hear my wife rate though not without cause at her maid Nell, who is a lazy slut. So to prayers and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-1-23" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-01-23">13th</time>. All the morning at home, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Berkenshaw<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1291" id="noteref-1291" epub:type="noteref">1291</a> (whom I have not seen a great while, came to see me), who stayed with me a great while talking of musique, and I am resolved to begin to learn of him to compose, and to begin tomorrow, he giving of me so great hopes that I shall soon do it. Before twelve o’clock comes, by appointment, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Peter and the Dean, and Collonel Honiwood, brothers,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1292" id="noteref-1292" epub:type="noteref">1292</a> to dine with me; but so soon that I was troubled at it. But, however, I entertained them with talk and oysters till one o’clock, and then we sat down to dinner, not staying for my uncle and aunt Wight, at which I was troubled, but they came by and by, and so we dined very merry, at least I seemed so, but the dinner does not please me, and less the Dean and Collonel, whom I found to be pitiful sorry gentlemen, though good-natured, but <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Peter above them both, who after dinner did show us the experiment (which I had heard talk of) of the chymicall glasses, which break all to dust by breaking off a little small end; which is a great mystery to me.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1293" id="noteref-1293" epub:type="noteref">1293</a> They being gone, my aunt Wight and my wife and I to cards, she teaching of us how to play at gleeke,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1294" id="noteref-1294" epub:type="noteref">1294</a> which is a pretty game; but I have not my head so free as to be troubled with it. By and by comes my uncle Wight back, and so to supper and talk, and then again to cards, when my wife and I beat them two games and they us one, and so good night and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-1-24" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-01-24">14th</time>. All the morning at home, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Berkenshaw by appointment yesterday coming to me, and begun composition of musique, and he being gone I to settle my papers and things in my chamber, and so after dinner in the afternoon to the office, and thence to my chamber about several businesses of the office and my own, and then to supper and to bed. This day my brave vellum covers to keep pictures in, come in, which pleases me very much.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-1-25" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-01-25">15th</time>. This morning <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Berkenshaw came again, and after he had examined me and taught me something in my work, he and I went to breakfast in my chamber upon a collar of brawn, and after we had eaten, asked me whether we had not committed a fault in eating today; telling me that it is a fast day ordered by the Parliament, to pray for more seasonable weather;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1295" id="noteref-1295" epub:type="noteref">1295</a> it having hitherto been summer weather, that it is, both as to warmth and every other thing, just as if it were the middle of May or June, which do threaten a plague (as all men think) to follow, for so it was almost the last winter; and the whole year after hath been a very sickly time to this day.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1296" id="noteref-1296" epub:type="noteref">1296</a> I did not stir out of my house all day, but conned my musique, and at night after supper to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-1-26" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-01-26">16th</time>. Towards Cheapside; and in Paul’s Churchyard saw the funeral of my Lord Cornwallis, late Steward<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1297" id="noteref-1297" epub:type="noteref">1297</a> of the King’s House, a bold profane talking man, go by, and thence I to the Paynter’s, and there paid him £6 for the two pictures, and 36<abbr>s.</abbr> for the two frames. From thence home, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Holliard and my brother Tom dined with me, and he did give me good advice about my health. In the afternoon at the office, and at night to Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten, and there saw him and Captain Cock and Stokes play at cards, and afterwards supped with them. Stokes told us, that notwithstanding the country of Gambo<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1298" id="noteref-1298" epub:type="noteref">1298</a> is so unhealthy, yet the people of the place live very long, so as the present king there is 150 years old, which they count by rains: because every year it rains continually four months together. He also told us, that the kings there have above 100 wives apiece, and offered him the choice of any of his wives to lie with, and so he did Captain Holmes. So home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-1-27" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-01-27">17th</time>. To Westminster with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore, and there, after several walks up and down to hear news, I met with Lany, the Frenchman, who told me that he had a letter from France last night, that tells him that my Lord Hinchingbroke is dead, and that he did die yesterday was se’nnight,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1299" id="noteref-1299" epub:type="noteref">1299</a> which do surprise me exceedingly (though we know that he hath been sick these two months), so I hardly ever was in my life; but being fearfull that my Lady should come to hear it too suddenly, he and I went up to my Lord Crew’s, and there I dined with him, and after dinner we told him, and the whole family is much disturbed by it: so we consulted what to do to tell my Lady of it; and at last we thought of my going first to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> George Montagu’s to hear whether he had any news of it, which I did, and there found all his house in great heaviness for the death of his son, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> George Montagu,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1300" id="noteref-1300" epub:type="noteref">1300</a> who did go with our young gentlemen into France, and that they hear nothing at all of our young Lord; so believing that thence comes the mistake, I returned to my Lord Crew (in my way in the Piazza seeing a house on fire, and all the streets full of people to quench it), and told them of it, which they are much glad of, and conclude, and so I hope, that my Lord is well; and so I went to my Lady Sandwich, and told her all, and after much talk I parted thence with my wife, who had been there all the day, and so home to my musique, and then to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-1-28" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-01-28">18th</time>. This morning I went to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Williams, and there he told me how <abbr class="name">T.</abbr> Trice had spoke to him about getting me to meet that our difference might be made up between us by ourselves, which I am glad of, and have appointed Monday next to be the day. Thence to the Wardrobe, and there hearing it would be late before they went to dinner, I went and spent some time in Paul’s Churchyard among some books, and then returned thither, and there dined with my Lady and Sir <abbr class="name">H.</abbr> Wright and his lady, all glad of yesterday’s mistake, and after dinner to the office, and then home and wrote letters by the post to my father, and by and by comes <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore to give me an account how <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Montagu<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1301" id="noteref-1301" epub:type="noteref">1301</a> was gone away of a sudden with the fleet, in such haste that he hath left behind some servants, and many things of consequence; and among others, my Lord’s commission for Embassador. Whereupon he and I took coach, and to Whitehall to my Lord’s lodgings, to have spoke with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ralph Montagu,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1302" id="noteref-1302" epub:type="noteref">1302</a> his brother (and here we stayed talking with Sarah and the old man); but by and by hearing that he was in Covent Garden, we went thither: and at my Lady Harvy’s, his sister, I spoke with him, and he tells me that the commission is not left behind. And so I went thence by the same coach (setting down <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore) home, and after having wrote a letter to my Lord at 12 o’clock at night by post I went to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-1-29" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-01-29">19th (Lord’s day)</time>. To church in the morning, where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mills preached upon Christ’s being offered up for our sins, and there proving the equity with what justice God would lay our sins upon his Son, he did make such a sermon (among other things pleading, from God’s universal sovereignty over all his creatures, the power he has of commanding what he would of his Son by the same rule as that he might have made us all, and the whole world from the beginning to have been in hell, arguing from the power the potter has over his clay), that I could have wished he had let it alone; and speaking again, the Father is now so satisfied by our security for our debt, that we might say at the last day as many of us as have interest in Christ’s death: Lord, we owe thee nothing, our debt is paid. We are not beholden to thee for anything, for thy debt is paid to thee to the full; which methinks were very bold words. Home to dinner, and then my wife and I on foot to see <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Turner, who continues still sick, and thence into the Old Bayly by appointment to speak with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Norbury who lies at (it falls out) next door to my uncle Fenner’s; but as God would have it, we having no desire to be seen by his people, he having lately married a midwife that is old and ugly, and that hath already brought home to him a daughter and three children, we were let in at a back door. And here she offered me the refusall of some lands of her’s at Brampton, if I have a mind to buy, which I answered her I was not at present provided to do. She took occasion to talk of her sister Wight’s making much of the Wights, who for namesake only my uncle do show great kindness to, so I fear may do us that are nearer to him a great deal of wrong, if he should die without children, which I am sorry for. Thence to my uncle Wight’s, and there we supped and were merry, though my uncle hath lately lost 200 or 300 at sea, and I am troubled to hear that the Turks do take more and more of our ships in the Straights, and that our merchants here in London do daily break, and are still likely to do so. So home, and I put in at Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten’s, where Major Holmes was, and in our discourse and drinking I did give Sir <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Mennes’ health, which he swore he would not pledge, and called him knave and coward (upon the business of Holmes with the Swedish ship lately), which we all and I particularly did desire him to forbear, he being of our fraternity, which he took in great dudgeon, and I was vexed to hear him persist in calling him so, though I believe it to be true, but however he is to blame and I am troubled at it. So home and to prayers, and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-1-30" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-01-30">20th</time>. This morning Sir <abbr class="name">Wm.</abbr> Batten and Pen and I did begin the examining the Treasurer’s accounts, the first time ever he had passed in the office, which is very long, and we were all at it till noon, and then to dinner, he providing a fine dinner for us, and we eat it at Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten’s, where we were very merry, there being at table the Treasurer and we three, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wayth, Ferrer, Smith, Turner, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Morrice, the wine cooper, who this day did divide the two butts, which we four did send for, of sherry from Cales, and mine was put into a hogshead, and the vessel filled up with four gallons of Malaga wine, but what it will stand us in I know not: but it is the first great quantity of wine that I ever bought. And after dinner to the office all the afternoon till late at night, and then home, where my aunt and uncle Wight and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Anne Wight came to play at cards (at gleek which she taught me and my wife last week) and so to supper, and then to cards and so good night. Then I to my practice of musique and then at 12 o’clock to bed. This day the workmen began to make me a sellar door out of the back yard, which will much please me.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-1-31" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-01-31">21st</time>. To the finishing of the Treasurer’s accounts this morning, and then to dinner again, and were merry as yesterday, and so home, and then to the office till night, and then home to write letters, and to practise my composition of musique, and then to bed. We have heard nothing yet how far the fleet hath got toward Portugall, but the wind being changed again, we fear they are stopped, and may be beat back again to the coast of Ireland.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-2-1" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-02-01">22nd</time>. After musique-practice, to Whitehall, and thence to Westminster, in my way calling at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> George Montagu’s, to condole him the loss of his son, who was a fine gentleman, and it is no doubt a great discomfort to our two young gentlemen, his companions in France. After this discourse he told me, among other news, the great jealousys that are now in the Parliament House. The Lord Chancellor, it seems, taking occasion from this late plot to raise fears in the people, did project the raising of an army forthwith, besides the constant militia, thinking to make the Duke of York General thereof. But the House did, in very open terms, say, they were grown too wise to be fooled again into another army; and said they had found how that man that hath the command of an army is not beholden to anybody to make him King. There are factions (private ones at Court) about Madam Palmer; but what it is about I know not. But it is something about the King’s favour to her now that the Queen is coming. He told me, too, what sport the King and Court do make at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Edward Montagu’s leaving his things behind him. But the Chancellor (taking it a little more seriously) did openly say to my Lord Chamberlain,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1303" id="noteref-1303" epub:type="noteref">1303</a> that had it been such a gallant as my Lord Mandeville<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1304" id="noteref-1304" epub:type="noteref">1304</a> his son, it might have; been taken as a frolique; but for him that would be thought a grave coxcomb, it was very strange. Thence to the Hall, where I heard the House had ordered all the King’s murderers, that remain, to be executed, but Fleetwood<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1305" id="noteref-1305" epub:type="noteref">1305</a> and Downes.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1306" id="noteref-1306" epub:type="noteref">1306</a> So to the Wardrobe and there dined, meeting my wife there, who went after dinner with my Lady to see <abbr>Mr.</abbr> George Montagu’s lady, and I to have a meeting by appointment with <abbr class="name">Tho.</abbr> Trice and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Williams in order to a treating about the difference between us, but I find there is no hopes of ending it but by law, and so after a pint or two of wine we parted. So to the Wardrobe for my wife again, and so home, and after writing and doing some things to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-2-2" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-02-02">23rd</time>. All the morning with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Berkenshaw, and after him <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore in discourse of business, and in the afternoon by coach by invitacon to my uncle Fenner’s, where I found his new wife, a pitiful, old, ugly, illbred woman in a hatt, a midwife. Here were many of his, and as many of her relations, sorry, mean people; and after choosing our gloves, we all went over to the Three Crane Tavern,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1307" id="noteref-1307" epub:type="noteref">1307</a> and though the best room in the house, in such a narrow dogg-hole we were crammed, and I believe we were near forty, that it made me loathe my company and victuals; and a sorry poor dinner it was too. After dinner, I took aside the two Joyce’s, and took occasion to thank them for their kind thoughts for a wife for Tom: but that considering the possibility there is of my having no child, and what then I shall be able to leave him, I do think he may expect in that respect a wife with more money, and so desired them to think no more of it. Now the jest was Anthony mistakes and thinks that I did all this while encourage him (from my thoughts of favour to Tom) to pursue the match till Will Joyce tells him that he was mistaken. But how he takes it I know not, but I endeavoured to tell it him in the most respectful way that I could. This done with my wife by coach to my aunt Wight’s, where I left her, and I to the office, and that being done to her again, and sat playing at cards after supper till 12 at night, and so by moonshine home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-2-3" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-02-03">24th</time>. This morning came my cousin <abbr class="name">Thos.</abbr> Pepys the Executor, to speak with me, and I had much talk with him both about matters of money which my Lord Sandwich has of his and I am bond for, as also of my uncle Thomas, who I hear by him do stand upon very high terms. Thence to my painter’s, and there I saw our pictures in the frames, which please me well. Thence to the Wardrobe, where very merry with my Lady, and after dinner I sent for the pictures thither, and mine is well liked; but she is much offended with my wife’s, and I am of her opinion, that it do much wrong her; but I will have it altered. So home, in my way calling at Pope’s Head alley, and there bought me a pair of scissars and a brass square. So home and to my study and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-2-4" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-02-04">25th</time>. At home and the office all the morning. Walking in the garden<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1308" id="noteref-1308" epub:type="noteref">1308</a> to give the gardener directions what to do this year (for I intend to have the garden handsome), Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen came to me, and did break a business to me about removing his son from Oxford to Cambridge to some private college. I proposed Magdalene, but cannot name a tutor at present; but I shall think and write about it. Thence with him to the Trinity-house to dinner; where Sir Richard Brown<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1309" id="noteref-1309" epub:type="noteref">1309</a> (one of the clerks of the Council, and who is much concerned against Sir <abbr class="name">N.</abbr> Crisp’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1310" id="noteref-1310" epub:type="noteref">1310</a> project of making a great sasse<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1311" id="noteref-1311" epub:type="noteref">1311</a> in the King’s lands about Deptford, to be a wett-dock to hold 200 sail of ships. But the ground, it seems, was long since given by the King to Sir Richard) was, and after the Trinity-house men had done their business, the master, Sir William Rider, came to bid us welcome; and so to dinner, where good cheer and discourse, but I eat a little too much beef, which made me sick, and so after dinner we went to the office, and there in a garden I went in the dark and vomited, whereby I did much ease my stomach. Thence to supper with my wife to Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen’s, his daughter being come home today, not being very well, and so while we were at supper comes <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore with letters from my Lord Sandwich, speaking of his lying still at Tangier, looking for the fleet; which, we hope, is now in a good way thither. So home to write letters by the post tonight, and then again to Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen’s to cards, where very merry, and so home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-2-5" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-02-05">26th (Lord’s day)</time>. To church in the morning, and then home to dinner alone with my wife, and so both to church in the afternoon and home again, and so to read and talk with my wife, and to supper and to bed. It having been a very fine clear frosty day⁠—God send us more of them!⁠—for the warm weather all this winter makes us fear a sick summer. But thanks be to God, since my leaving drinking of wine, I do find myself much better and do mind my business better, and do spend less money, and less time lost in idle company.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-2-6" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-02-06">27th</time>. This morning, both Sir Williams and I by barge to Deptford-yard to give orders in businesses there; and called on several ships, also to give orders, and so to Woolwich, and there dined at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Falconer’s of victuals we carried ourselves, and one <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dekins, the father of my Morena,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1312" id="noteref-1312" epub:type="noteref">1312</a> of whom we have lately bought some hemp. That being done we went home again. This morning, going to take water upon Tower-hill, we met with three sleddes standing there to carry my Lord Monson<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1313" id="noteref-1313" epub:type="noteref">1313</a> and Sir <abbr class="name">H.</abbr> Mildmay<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1314" id="noteref-1314" epub:type="noteref">1314</a> and another,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1315" id="noteref-1315" epub:type="noteref">1315</a> to the gallows and back again, with ropes about their necks; which is to be repeated every year, this being the day of their sentencing the King.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-2-7" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-02-07">28th</time>. This morning (after my musique practice with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Berkenshaw) with my wife to the Paynter’s, where we stayed very late to have her picture mended, which at last is come to be very like her, and I think well done; but the Paynter, though a very honest man, I found to be very silly as to matter of skill in shadows, for we were long in discourse, till I was almost angry to hear him talk so simply. So home to dinner and then to the office, and so home for all night.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-2-8" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-02-08">29th</time>. To Westminster, and at the Parliament door spoke with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry about business, and so to the Wardrobe to dinner, and thence to several places, and so home, where I found <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Pen and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Rooth and Smith, who played at cards with my wife, and I did give them a barrel of oysters, and had a pullet to supper for them, and when it was ready to come to table, the foolish girl had not the manners to stay and sup with me, but went away, which did vex me cruelly. So I saw her home, and then to supper, and so to musique practice, and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-2-9" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-02-09">30th</time>. Fast-day for the murthering of the late King. I went to church, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mills made a good sermon upon David’s words, “Who can lay his hands upon the Lord’s Anoynted and be guiltless?”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1316" id="noteref-1316" epub:type="noteref">1316</a> So home and to dinner, and employed all the afternoon in my chamber, setting things and papers to rights, which pleased me very well, and I think I shall begin to take pleasure in being at home and minding my business. I pray God I may, for I find a great need thereof. At night to supper and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1662-2-10" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1662-02-10">31st</time>. All the morning, after musique practice, in my cellar, ordering some alterac̃ons therein, being much pleased with my new door into the back yard. So to dinner, and all the afternoon thinking upon business. I did by night set many things in order, which pleased me well, and puts me upon a resolution of keeping within doors and minding my business and the business of the office, which I pray God I may put in practice. At night to bed.</p>
			</article>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
