<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>July 1663</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-43" epub:type="chapter z3998:diary">
			<h2 epub:type="title">July 1663</h2>
			<article id="entry-1663-7-11" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-07-11">July 1st</time>. This morning it rained so hard (though it was fair yesterday, and we thereupon in hopes of having some fair weather, which we have wanted these three months) that it wakened Creed, who lay with me last night, and me, and so we up and fell to discourse of the business of his accounts now under dispute, in which I have taken much trouble upon myself and raised a distance between Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Carteret and myself, which troubles me, but I hope we have this morning light on an expedient that will right all, that will answer their queries, and yet save Creed the £500 which he did propose to make of the exchange abroad of the pieces of eight which he disbursed. Being ready, he and I by water to Whitehall, where I left him before we came into the Court, for fear I should be seen by Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Carteret with him, which of late I have been forced to avoid to remove suspicion. I to <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s, and there discoursed a while with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry, between whom and myself there is very good understanding and friendship, and so to Westminster Hall, and being in the Parliament lobby, I there saw my Lord of Bristoll<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1846" id="noteref-1846" epub:type="noteref">1846</a> come to the Commons House to give his answer to their question, about some words he should tell the King that were spoke by Sir Richard Temple, a member of their House. A chair was set at the bar of the House for him, which he used but little, but made an harangue of half an hour bareheaded, the House covered. His speech being done, he came out and withdrew into a little room till the House had concluded of an answer to his speech; which they staying long upon, I went away. And by and by out comes Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten; and he told me that his Lordship had made a long and a comedian-like speech, and delivered with such action as was not becoming his Lordship. He confesses he did tell the King such a thing of Sir Richard Temple, but that upon his honour they were not spoke by Sir Richard, he having taken a liberty of enlarging to the King upon the discourse which had been between Sir Richard and himself lately; and so took upon himself the whole blame, and desired their pardon, it being not to do any wrong to their fellow-member, but out of zeal to the King. He told them, among many other things, that as to his religion he was a Roman Catholic, but such a one as thought no man to have right to the Crown of England but the Prince that hath it; and such a one as, if the King should desire his counsel as to his own, he would not advise him to another religion than the old true reformed religion of this country, it being the properest of this kingdom as it now stands; and concluded with a submission to what the House shall do with him, saying, that whatever they shall do, says he, “thanks be to God, this head, this heart, and this sword (pointing to them all), will find me a being in any place in Europe.” The House hath hereupon voted clearly Sir Richard Temple to be free from the imputation of saying those words; but when Sir William Batten came out, had not concluded what to say to my Lord, it being argued that to own any satisfaction as to my Lord from his speech, would be to lay some fault upon the King for the message he should upon no better accounts send to the impeaching of one of their members. Walking out, I hear that the House of Lords are offended that my Lord Digby should come to this House and make a speech there without leave first asked of the House of Lords. I hear also of another difficulty now upon him; that my Lord of Sunderland<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1847" id="noteref-1847" epub:type="noteref">1847</a> (whom I do not know) was so near to the marriage of his daughter as that the wedding-clothes were made, and portion and everything agreed on and ready; and the other day he goes away nobody yet knows whither, sending her the next morning a release of his right or claim to her, and advice to his friends not to enquire into the reason of this doing, for he hath enough for it; but that he gives them liberty to say and think what they will of him, so they do not demand the reason of his leaving her, being resolved never to have her, but the reason desires and resolves not to give.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1848" id="noteref-1848" epub:type="noteref">1848</a> Thence by water with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten to Trinity House, there to dine with him, which we did; and after dinner we fell talking, Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Batten and I; <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Batten telling us of a late triall of Sir Charles Sydly<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1849" id="noteref-1849" epub:type="noteref">1849</a> the other day, before my Lord Chief Justice Foster<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1850" id="noteref-1850" epub:type="noteref">1850</a> and the whole bench, for his debauchery a little while since at Oxford Kate’s,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1851" id="noteref-1851" epub:type="noteref">1851</a> coming in open day into the Balcone and showed his nakedness,⁠ ⁠… and abusing of scripture and as it were from thence preaching a mountebank sermon from the pulpit, saying that there he had to sell such a powder as should make all the [women] in town run after him, 1,000 people standing underneath to see and hear him, and that being done he took a glass of wine⁠ ⁠… and then drank it off, and then took another and drank the King’s health. It seems my Lord and the rest of the judges did all of them round give him a most high reproof; my Lord Chief justice saying, that it was for him, and such wicked wretches as he was, that God’s anger and judgments hung over us, calling him sirrah many times. It’s said they have bound him to his good behaviour (there being no law against him for it) in £5,000. It being told that my Lord Buckhurst was there, my Lord asked whether it was that Buckhurst that was lately tried for robbery;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1852" id="noteref-1852" epub:type="noteref">1852</a> and when answered Yes, he asked whether he had so soon forgot his deliverance at that time, and that it would have more become him to have been at his prayers begging God’s forgiveness, than now running into such courses again.⁠ ⁠… Thence home, and my clerks being gone by my leave to see the East India ships that are lately come home, I stayed all alone within my office all the afternoon. This day I hear at dinner that Don John of Austria, since his flight out of Portugal, is dead of his wounds:<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1853" id="noteref-1853" epub:type="noteref">1853</a> so there is a great man gone, and a great dispute like to be ended for the crown of Spain, if the King should have died before him. I received this morning a letter from my wife, brought by John Gower to town, wherein I find a sad falling out between my wife and my father and sister and Ashwell upon my writing to my father to advise Pall not to keep Ashwell from her mistress, or making any difference between them. Which Pall telling to Ashwell, and she speaking some words that her mistress heard, caused great difference among them; all which I am sorry from my heart to hear of, and I fear will breed ill blood not to be laid again. So that I fear my wife and I may have some falling out about it, or at least my father and I, but I shall endeavour to salve up all as well as I can, or send for her out of the country before the time intended, which I would be loth to do. In the evening by water to my <abbr>coz.</abbr> Roger Pepys’ chamber, where he was not come, but I found <abbr>Dr.</abbr> John newly come to town, and is well again after his sickness; but, Lord! what a simple man he is as to any public matter of state, and talks so sillily to his brother <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Tom. What the matter is I know not, but he has taken (as my father told me a good while since) such displeasure that he hardly would touch his hat to me, and I as little to him. By and by comes Roger, and he told us the whole passage of my Lord Digby today, much as I have said here above; only that he did say that he would draw his sword against the Pope himself, if he should offer anything against his Majesty, and the good of these nations; and that he never was the man that did either look for a Cardinal’s cap for himself, or anybody else, meaning Abbot Montagu;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1854" id="noteref-1854" epub:type="noteref">1854</a> and the House upon the whole did vote Sir Richard Temple innocent; and that my Lord Digby hath cleared the honour of his Majesty, and Sir Richard Temple’s, and given perfect satisfaction of his own respects to the House. Thence to my brother’s, and being vexed with his not minding my father’s business here in getting his Landscape done, I went away in an anger, and walked home, and so up to my lute and then to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-7-12" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-07-12">2nd</time>. Up betimes to my office, and there all the morning doing business, at noon to the ’Change, and there met with several people, among others Captain Cox, and with him to a Coffee [House], and drank with him and some other merchants. Good discourse. Thence home and to dinner, and, after a little alone at my viol, to the office, where we sat all the afternoon, and so rose at the evening, and then home to supper and to bed, after a little music. My mind troubled me with the thoughts of the difference between my wife and my father in the country. Walking in the garden this evening with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Carteret and Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes, Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Carteret told us with great contempt how like a stage-player my Lord Digby spoke yesterday, pointing to his head as my Lord did, and saying, “First, for his head,” says Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Carteret, “I know what a calf’s head would have done better by half: for his heart and his sword, I have nothing to say to them.” He told us that for certain his head cost the late King his, for it was he that broke off the treaty at Uxbridge. He told us also how great a man he was raised from a private gentleman<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1855" id="noteref-1855" epub:type="noteref">1855</a> in France by Monsieur Grandmont,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1856" id="noteref-1856" epub:type="noteref">1856</a> and afterwards by the Cardinall<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1857" id="noteref-1857" epub:type="noteref">1857</a> who raised him to be a Lieutenant-general, and then higher; and entrusted by the Cardinall, when he was banished out of France, with great matters, and recommended by him to the Queen<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1858" id="noteref-1858" epub:type="noteref">1858</a> as a man to be trusted and ruled by: yet when he came to have some power over the Queen, he begun to dissuade her from her opinion of the Cardinal; which she said nothing to till the Cardinal was returned, and then she told him of it; who told my Lord Digby, “<i xml:lang="fr">Eh bien, Monsieur, vous estes un fort bon amy donc:</i>” but presently put him out of all; and then he was, from a certainty of coming in two or three years’ time to be Mareschall of France (to which all strangers, even Protestants,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1859" id="noteref-1859" epub:type="noteref">1859</a> and those as often as French themselves, are capable of coming, though it be one of the greatest places in France), he was driven to go out of France into Flanders; but there was not trusted, nor received any kindness from the Prince of Conde, as one to whom also he had been false, as he had been to the Cardinal and Grandmont. In fine, he told us how he is a man of excellent parts, but of no great faith nor judgment, and one very easy to get up to great height of preferment, but never able to hold it. So home and to my music; and then comes <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed to me giving me an account of his accounts, how he has now settled them fit for perusal the most strict, at which I am glad. So he and I to bed together.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-7-13" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-07-13">3rd</time>. Up and he home, and I with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes and Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten by coach to Westminster, to <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s, thinking to meet Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Carteret, and to attend the Duke, but he not coming we broke up, and so to Westminster Hall, and there meeting with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore he tells me great news that my Lady Castlemaine is fallen from Court, and this morning retired. He gives me no account of the reason of it, but that it is so: for which I am sorry: and yet if the King do it to leave off not only her but all other mistresses, I should be heartily glad of it, that he may fall to look after business. I hear my Lord Digby is condemned at Court for his speech, and that my Lord Chancellor grows great again. Thence with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed, whom I called at his chamber, over the water to Lambeth; but could not, it being morning, get to see the Archbishop’s hearse: so he and I walked over the fields to Southwark, and there parted, and I spent half an hour in Mary Overy’s Church,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1860" id="noteref-1860" epub:type="noteref">1860</a> where are fine monuments of great antiquity, I believe, and has been a fine church. Thence to the ’Change, and meeting Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes there, he and I walked to look upon Backwell’s design of making another alley from his shop through over against the Exchange door,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1861" id="noteref-1861" epub:type="noteref">1861</a> which will be very noble and quite put down the other two. So home to dinner and then to the office, and entered in my manuscript book the Victualler’s contract, and then over the water and walked to see Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn, and sat with him a while, and so home late, and to my viol. So up comes Creed again to me and stays all night, tomorrow morning being a hearing before the Duke. So to bed full of discourse of his business.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-7-14" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-07-14">4th</time>. Up by 4 o’clock and sent him to get matters ready, and I to my office looking over papers and mending my manuscript by scraping out the blots and other things, which is now a very fine book. So to <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s by water with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes and Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten, I giving occasion to a wager about the tide, that it did flow through bridge, by which Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten won 5<abbr>s.</abbr> of Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes. At <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s we stayed while the Duke made himself ready. Among other things Sir Allen Apsley<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1862" id="noteref-1862" epub:type="noteref">1862</a> showed the Duke the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Lisbon Gazette</i> in Spanish, where the late victory is set down particularly, and to the great honour of the English beyond measure. They have since taken back Evora,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1863" id="noteref-1863" epub:type="noteref">1863</a> which was lost to the Spaniards, the English making the assault, and lost not more than three men. Here I learnt that the English foot are highly esteemed all over the world, but the horse not so much, which yet we count among ourselves the best; but they abroad have had no great knowledge of our horse, it seems. The Duke being ready, we retired with him, and there fell upon <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed’s business, where the Treasurer did, like a mad coxcomb, without reason or method run over a great many things against the account, and so did Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes and Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten, which the Duke himself and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry and my Lord Barkely and myself did remove, and Creed being called in did answer all with great method and excellently to the purpose (myself I am a little conscious did not speak so well as I purposed and do think I used to do, that is, not so intelligibly and persuasively, as I well hoped I should), not that what I said was not well taken, and did carry the business with what was urged and answered by Creed and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry, till the Duke himself did declare that he was satisfied, and my Lord Barkely offered to lay £100 that the King would receive no wrong in the account, and the two last knights held their tongues, or at least by not understanding it did say what made for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed, and so Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Carteret was left alone, but yet persisted to say that the account was not good, but full of corruption and foul dealing. And so we broke up to his shame, but I do fear to the loss of his friendship to me a good while, which I am heartily troubled for. Thence with Creed to the King’s Head ordinary; but, coming late, dined at the second table very well for 12<abbr>d.</abbr>; and a pretty gentleman in our company, who confirms my Lady Castlemaine’s being gone from Court, but knows not the reason; he told us of one wipe the Queen a little while ago did give her, when she came in and found the Queen under the dresser’s hands, and had been so long: “I wonder your Majesty,” says she, “can have the patience to sit so long a-dressing?”⁠—“I have so much reason to use patience,” says the Queen, “that I can very well bear with it.” He thinks that it may be the Queen hath commanded her to retire, though that is not likely. Thence with Creed to hire a coach to carry us to Hide Park, today there being a general muster of the King’s Guards, horse and foot: but they demand so high, that I, spying <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cutler the merchant, did take notice of him, and he going into his coach, and telling me that he was going to show a couple of Swedish strangers the muster, I asked and went along with him; where a goodly sight to see so many fine horses and officers, and the King, Duke, and others come by a-horseback, and the two Queens in the Queen-Mother’s coach, my Lady Castlemaine not being there. And after long being there, I ’light, and walked to the place where the King, Duke, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, did stand to see the horse and foot march by and discharge their guns, to show a French Marquisse (for whom this muster was caused) the goodness of our firemen; which indeed was very good, though not without a slip now and then; and one broadside close to our coach we had going out of the Park, even to the nearness as to be ready to burn our hairs. Yet methought all these gay men are not the soldiers that must do the King’s business, it being such as these that lost the old King all he had, and were beat by the most ordinary fellows that could be. Thence with much ado out of the Park, and I ’lighted and through <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s down the waterside over, to Lambeth, to see the Archbishop’s corpse (who is to be carried away to Oxford on Monday), but came too late, and so walked over the fields and bridge home (calling by the way at old George’s), but find that he is dead, and there wrote several letters, and so home to supper and to bed. This day in the Duke’s chamber there being a Roman story in the hangings, and upon the standards written these four letters⁠—<abbr xml:lang="la">S. P. Q. R.</abbr>, Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Carteret came to me to know what the meaning of those four letters were; which ignorance is not to be borne in a Privy Counsellor, methinks, that a schoolboy should be whipt for not knowing.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-7-15" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-07-15">5th (Lord’s day)</time>. Lady Batten had sent twice to invite me to go with them to Walthamstow today, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Martha<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1864" id="noteref-1864" epub:type="noteref">1864</a> being married already this morning to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Castle, at this parish church. I could not rise soon enough to go with them, but got myself ready, and so to Games’s, where I got a horse and rode thither very pleasantly, only coming to make water I found a stopping, which makes me fearful of my old pain. Being come thither, I was well received, and had two pair of gloves, as the rest, and walked up and down with my Lady in the garden, she mighty kind to me, and I have the way to please her. A good dinner and merry, but methinks none of the kindness nor bridall respect between the bridegroom and bride, that was between my wife and I, but as persons that marry purely for convenience. After dinner to church by coach, and there my Lady, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Turner, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lemon,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1865" id="noteref-1865" epub:type="noteref">1865</a> and I only, we, in spite to one another, kept one another awake; and sometimes I read in my book of Latin plays, which I took in my pocket, thinking to have walked it. An old doting parson preached. So home again, and by and by up and homewards, calling in our way (Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes and I only) at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Batten’s (who with his lady and child went in another coach by us), which is a very pretty house, and himself in all things within and without very ingenious, and I find a very fine study and good books. So set out, Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes and I in his coach together, talking all the way of chymistry, wherein he do know something, at least, seems so to me, that cannot correct him, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Batten’s man riding my horse, and so home and to my office a while to read my vows, then home to prayers and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-7-16" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-07-16">6th</time>. Up pretty early and to my office all the morning, writing out a list of the King’s ships in my Navy collections with great pleasure. At noon Creed comes to me, who tells me how well he has sped with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Carteret after all our trouble, that he had his tallies up and all the kind words possible from him, which I believe is out of an apprehension what a fool he has made of himself hitherto in making so great a stop therein. But I find, and so my Lord Sandwich may, that Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Carteret had a design to do him a disgrace, if he could possibly, otherwise he would never have carried the business so far after that manner, but would first have consulted my Lord and given him advice what to do therein for his own honour, which he thought endangered. Creed dined with me and then walked a while, and so away, and I to my office at my morning’s work till dark night, and so with good content home. To supper, a little music, and then to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-7-17" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-07-17">7th</time>. Up by 4 o’clock and to my office, and there continued all the morning upon my Navy book to my great content. At noon down by barge with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes (who is going to Chatham) to Woolwich, in our way eating of some venison pasty in the barge, I having neither eat nor drank today, which fills me full of wind. Here also in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pett’s garden I eat some and the first cherries I have eat this year, off the tree where the King himself had been gathering some this morning. Thence walked alone, only part of the way Deane walked with me, complaining of many abuses in the Yard, to Greenwich, and so by water to Deptford, where I found <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry, and with him up and down all the stores, to the great trouble of the officers, and by his help I am resolved to fall hard to work again, as I used to do. So thence he and I by water talking of many things, and I see he puts his trust most upon me in the Navy, and talks, as there is reason, slightly of the two old knights, and I should be glad by any drudgery to see the King’s stores and service looked to as they ought, but I fear I shall never understand half the miscarriages and tricks that the King suffers by. He tells me what <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pett did today, that my Lord Bristoll told the King that he will impeach the Chancellor of High Treason: but I find that my Lord Bristoll hath undone himself already in everybody’s opinion, and now he endeavours to raise dust to put out other men’s eyes, as well as his own; but I hope it will not take, in consideration merely that it is hard for a Prince to spare an experienced old officer, be he never so corrupt; though I hope this man is not so, as some report him to be. He tells me that Don John is yet alive, and not killed, as was said, in the great victory against the Spaniards in Portugal of late. So home, and late at my office. Thence home and to my music. This night <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turner’s house being to be emptied out of my cellar, and therefore I think to sit up a little longer than ordinary. This afternoon, coming from the waterside with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry, I spied my boy upon Tower Hill playing with the rest of the boys; so I sent <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Griffin to take him, and he did bring him to me, and so I said nothing to him, but caused him to be stripped (for he was run away with his best suit), and so putting on his other, I sent him going, without saying one word hard to him, though I am troubled for the rogue, though he do not deserve it. Being come home I find my stomach not well for want of eating today my dinner as I should do, and so am become full of wind. I called late for some victuals, and so to bed, leaving the men below in the cellar emptying the vats up through <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turner’s own house, and so with more content to bed late.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-7-18" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-07-18">8th</time>. Being weary, and going to bed late last night, I slept till 7 o’clock, it raining mighty hard, and so did every minute of the day after sadly. But I know not what will become of the corn this year, we having had but two fair days these many months. Up and to my office, where all the morning busy, and then at noon home to dinner alone upon a good dish of eeles, given me by Michell, the Bewpers’ man, and then to my viol a little, and then down into the cellar and up and down with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turner to see where his vault may be made bigger, or another made him, which I think may well be. And so to my office, where very busy all day setting things in order my contract books and preparing things against the next sitting. In the evening I received letters out of the country, among others from my wife, who methinks writes so coldly that I am much troubled at it, and I fear shall have much ado to bring her to her old good temper. So home to supper and music, which is all the pleasure I have of late given myself, or is fit I should, others spending too much time and money. Going in I stepped to Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten, and there stayed and talked with him (my Lady being in the country), and sent for some lobsters, and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Turner came in, and did bring us an umble pie hot out of her oven, extraordinary good, and afterwards some spirits of her making, in which she has great judgment, very good, and so home, merry with this night’s refreshment.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-7-19" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-07-19">9th</time>. Up. Making water this morning, which I do every morning as soon as I am awake, with greater plenty and freedom than I used to do, which I think I may impute to last night’s drinking of elder spirits. Abroad, it raining, to Blackfriars, and there went into a little alehouse and stayed while I sent to the Wardrobe, but <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore was gone out. Here I kissed three or four times the maid of the house, who is a pretty girl, but very modest, and, God forgive me, had a mind to something more. Thence to my lawyer’s; up and down to the Six Clerks’ Office, where I found my bill against Tom Trice dismissed, which troubles me, it being through my neglect, and will put me to charges. So to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Phillips, and discoursed with him about finding me out somebody that will let me have for money an annuity of about £100 per annum for two lives. So home, and there put up my riding things against the evening, in case <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore should continue his mind to go to Oxford, which I have little mind to do, the weather continuing so bad and the waters high. Dined at home, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore in the afternoon comes to me and concluded not to go. Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten and I sat a little this afternoon at the office, and thence I by water to Deptford, and there mustered the Yard, purposely, God forgive me, to find out Bagwell, a carpenter, whose wife is a pretty woman, that I might have some occasion of knowing him and forcing her to come to the office again, which I did so luckily that going thence he and his wife did of themselves meet me in the way to thank me for my old kindness, but I spoke little to her, but shall give occasion for her coming to me. Her husband went along with me to show me Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn’s lodging, which I knew before, but only to have a time of speaking to him and sounding him. So left and I went in to Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn, who continues ill, and worse, I think, than before. He tells me my Lady Castlemaine was at Court, for all this talk this week, which I am glad to hear; but it seems the King is stranger than ordinary to her. Thence walked home as I used to do, and to bed presently, having taken great cold in my feet by walking in the dirt this day in thin shoes or some other way, so that I begun to be in pain, and with warm clothes made myself better by morning, but yet in pain.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-7-20" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-07-20">10th</time>. Up late and by water to Westminster Hall, where I met Pierce the chirurgeon, who tells me that for certain the King is grown colder to my Lady Castlemaine than ordinary, and that he believes he begins to love the Queen, and do make much of her, more than he used to do. Up to the Lobby, and there sent out for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry and Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten, and told them if they thought convenient I would go to Chatham today, Sir John Minnes being already there at a Pay, and I would do such and such business there, which they thought well of, and so I went home and prepared myself to go after, dinner with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten. Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry tell me that my Lord Bristoll hath this day impeached my Lord Chancellor in the House of Lords of High Treason. The chief of the articles are these: 1st. That he should be the occasion of the peace made with Holland lately upon such disadvantageous terms, and that he was bribed to it. 2nd. That Dunkirke was also sold by his advice chiefly, so much to the damage of England. 3rd. That he had £6,000 given him for the drawing-up or promoting of the Irish declaration lately, concerning the division of the lands there. 4th. He did carry on the design of the Portugal match, so much to the prejudice of the Crown of England, notwithstanding that he knew the Queen is not capable of bearing children. 5th. That the Duke’s marrying of his daughter was a practice of his, thereby to raise his family; and that it was done by indirect courses. 6th. That the breaking-off of the match with Parma, in which he was employed at the very time when the match with Portugal was made up here, which he took as a great slur to him, and so it was; and that, indeed, is the chief occasion of all this feud. 7th. That he hath endeavoured to bring in Popery, and wrote to the Pope for a cap for a subject of the King of England’s (my Lord Aubigny);<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1866" id="noteref-1866" epub:type="noteref">1866</a> and some say that he lays it to the Chancellor, that a good Protestant Secretary (Sir Edward Nicholas) was laid aside, and a Papist, Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Bennet, put in his room: which is very strange, when the last of these two is his own creature, and such an enemy accounted to the Chancellor, that they never did nor do agree; and all the world did judge the Chancellor to be falling from the time that Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Bennet was brought in. Besides my Lord Bristoll being a Catholic himself, all this is very strange. These are the main of the Articles. Upon which my Lord Chancellor desired that the noble Lord that brought in these Articles, would sign to them with his hand; which my Lord Bristoll did presently. Then the House did order that the judges should, against Monday next, bring in their opinion, Whether these articles are treason, or no? and next, they would know, Whether they were brought in regularly or no, without leave of the Lords’ House? After dinner I took boat (<abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Russell) and down to Gravesend in good time, and thence with a guide post to Chatham, where I found Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wayth walking in the garden, whom I told all this day’s news, which I left the town full of, and it is great news, and will certainly be in the consequence of it. By and by to supper, and after long discourse, Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes and I, he saw me to my chamber, which not pleasing me, I sent word so to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bradford, that I should be crowded into such a hole, while the clerks and boarders of her own take up the best rooms. However I lay there and slept well.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-7-21" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-07-21">11th</time>. Up early and to the Dock, and with the Storekeeper and other officers all the morning from one office to another. At noon to the Hill-house in Commissioner Pett’s coach, and after seeing the guard-ships, to dinner, and after dining done to the Dock by coach, it raining hard, to see <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">The Prince</i> launched, which hath lain in the Dock in repairing these three years. I went into her and was launched in her. Thence by boat ashore, it raining, and I went to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Barrow’s, where Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes and Commissioner Pett; we stayed long eating sweetmeats and drinking, and looking over some antiquities of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Barrow’s, among others an old manuscript Almanac, that I believe was made for some monastery, in parchment, which I could spend much time upon to understand. Here was a pretty young lady, a niece of Barrow’s, which I took much pleasure to look on. Thence by barge to <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary Creek; where Commissioner Pett (doubtful of the growing greatness of Portsmouth by the finding of those creeks there), do design a wet dock at no great charge, and yet no little one; he thinks towards £10,000. And the place, indeed, is likely to be a very fit place, when the King hath money to do it with. Thence, it raining as hard as it could pour down, home to the Hillhouse, and anon to supper, and after supper, Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes and I had great discourse with Captain Cox and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hempson about business of the yard, and particularly of pursers’ accounts with Hempson, who is a cunning knave in that point. So late to bed and, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wayth being gone, I lay above in the Treasurer’s bed and slept well. About one or two in the morning the curtains of my bed being drawn waked me, and I saw a man stand there by the inside of my bed calling me French dog 20 times, one after another, and I starting, as if I would get out of the bed, he fell a-laughing as hard as he could drive, still calling me French dog, and laid his hand on my shoulder. At last, whether I said anything or no I cannot tell, but I perceived the man, after he had looked wistly upon me, and found that I did not answer him to the names that he called me by, which was Salmon, Sir Carteret’s clerk, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Robt.</abbr> Maddox, another of the clerks, he put off his hat on a sudden, and forebore laughing, and asked who I was, saying, “Are you <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pepys?” I told him yes, and now being come a little better to myself, I found him to be Tom Willson, Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten’s clerk, and fearing he might be in some melancholy fit, I was at a loss what to do or say. At last I asked him what he meant. He desired my pardon for that he was mistaken, for he thought verily, not knowing of my coming to lie there, that it had been Salmon, the Frenchman, with whom he intended to have made some sport. So I made nothing of it, but bade him good night, and I, after a little pause, to sleep again, being well pleased that it ended no worse, and being a little the better pleased with it, because it was the Surveyor’s clerk, which will make sport when I come to tell Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten of it, it being a report that old Edgeborough,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1867" id="noteref-1867" epub:type="noteref">1867</a> the former Surveyor, who died here, do now and then walk.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-7-22" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-07-22">12th (Lord’s day)</time>. Up, and meeting Tom Willson he asked my pardon again, which I easily did give him, telling him only that it was well I was not a woman with child, for it might have made me miscarry. With Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes to church, where an indifferent good sermon. Here I saw <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Becky Allen, who hath been married, and is this day churched, after her bearing a child. She is grown tall, but looks very white and thin, and I can find no occasion while I am here to come to have her company, which I desire and expected in my coming, but only coming out of the church I kissed her and her sister and mother-in-law. So to dinner, Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes, Commissioner Pett, and I, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, and after dinner walked in the garden, it being a very fine day, the best we have had this great while, if not this whole summer. To church again, and after that walked through the Rope-ground to the Dock, and there over and over the Dock and grounds about it, and storehouses, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, with the officers of the Yard, and then to Commissioner Pett’s and had a good sullybub and other good things, and merry. Commissioner Pett showed me alone his bodies as a secret, which I found afterwards by discourse with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes that he had shown them him, wherein he seems to suppose great mystery in the nature of Lines to be hid, but I do not understand it at all. Thence walked to the Hill-house, being myself much dissatisfied, and more than I thought I should have been with Commissioner Pett, being, by what I saw since I came hither, convinced that he is not able to exercise the command in the Yard over the officers that he ought to do, or somebody else, if ever the service be well looked after there. Sat up and with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes talking, and he speaking his mind in slighting of the Commissioner, for which I wish there was not so much reason. For I do see he is but a man of words, though indeed he is the ablest man that we have to do service if he would or durst. Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes being gone to bed, I took <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Whitfield, one of the clerks, and walked to the Dock about eleven at night, and there got a boat and a crew, and rowed down to the guard-ships, it being a most pleasant moonshine evening that ever I saw almost. The guard-ships were very ready to hail us, being no doubt commanded thereto by their Captain, who remembers how I surprised them the last time I was here. However, I found him ashore, but the ship in pretty good order, and the arms well fixed, charged, and primed. Thence to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Soveraign</i>, where I found no officers aboard, no arms fixed, nor any powder to prime their few guns, which were charged, without bullet though. So to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">London</i>, where neither officers nor anybody awake; I boarded her, and might have done what I would, and at last could find but three little boys; and so spent the whole night in visiting all the ships, in which I found, for the most part, neither an officer aboard, nor any men so much as awake, which I was grieved to find, specially so soon after a great Larum, as Commissioner Pett brought us word that he [had] provided against, and put all in a posture of defence but a week ago, all which I am resolved to represent to the Duke.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-7-23" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-07-23">13th</time>. So, it being high day, I put in to shore and to bed for two hours just, and so up again, and with the Storekeeper and Clerk of the Rope-yard up and down the Dock and Rope-house, and by and by mustered the Yard, and instructed the Clerks of the Cheque in my new way of Callbook, and that and other things done, to the Hill-house, and there we eat something, and so by barge to Rochester, and there took coach hired for our passage to London, and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Allen, the clerk of the Rope-yard’s wife with us, desiring her passage, and it being a most pleasant and warm day, we got by four o’clock home. In our way she telling us in what condition Becky Allen<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1868" id="noteref-1868" epub:type="noteref">1868</a> is married against all expectation a fellow that proves to be a coxcomb and worth little if anything at all, and yet are entered into a way of living above their condition that will ruin them presently, for which, for the lady’s sake, I am much troubled. Home I found all well there, and after dressing myself, I walked to the Temple; and there, from my cousin Roger, hear that the judges have this day brought in their answer to the Lords, That the articles against my Lord Chancellor are not Treason; and tomorrow they are to bring in their arguments to the House for the same. This day also the King did send by my Lord Chamberlain to the Lords, to tell them from him, that the most of the articles against my Lord Chancellor he himself knows to be false. Thence by water to Whitehall, and so walked to <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s, but missed <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry. I met the Queen-Mother walking in the Pell Mell, led by my Lord <abbr>St.</abbr> Alban’s. And finding many coaches at the Gate, I found upon enquiry that the Duchess is brought to bed of a boy;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1869" id="noteref-1869" epub:type="noteref">1869</a> and hearing that the King and Queen are rode abroad with the Ladies of Honour to the Park, and seeing a great crowd of gallants staying here to see their return, I also stayed walking up and down, and among others spying a man like <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pembleton (though I have little reason to think it should be he, speaking and discoursing long with my Lord D’Aubigne), yet how my blood did rise in my face, and I fell into a sweat from my old jealousy and hate, which I pray God remove from me. By and by the King and Queen, who looked in this dress (a white laced waistcoat and a crimson short pettycoat, and her hair dressed <i xml:lang="fr">à la negligence</i>) mighty pretty; and the King rode hand in hand with her. Here was also my Lady Castlemaine rode among the rest of the ladies; but the King took, methought, no notice of her; nor when they ’light did anybody press (as she seemed to expect, and stayed for it) to take her down, but was taken down by her own gentleman. She looked mighty out of humour, and had a yellow plume in her hat (which all took notice of), and yet is very handsome, but very melancholy: nor did anybody speak to her, or she so much as smile or speak to anybody. I followed them up into Whitehall, and into the Queen’s presence, where all the ladies walked, talking and fiddling with their hats and feathers, and changing and trying one another’s by one another’s heads, and laughing. But it was the finest sight to me, considering their great beauties and dress, that ever I did see in all my life. But, above all, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Stewart in this dress, with her hat cocked and a red plume, with her sweet eye, little Roman nose, and excellent <i xml:lang="fr">taille</i>, is now the greatest beauty I ever saw, I think, in my life; and, if ever woman can, do exceed my Lady Castlemaine, at least in this dress nor do I wonder if the King changes, which I verily believe is the reason of his coldness to my Lady Castlemaine. Here late, with much ado I left to look upon them, and went away, and by water, in a boat with other strange company, there being no other to be had, and out of him into a sculler half to the bridge, and so home and to Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten, where I stayed telling him and Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Turner, with great mirth, my being frighted at Chatham by young Edgeborough, and so home to supper and to bed, before I sleep fancying myself to sport with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Stewart with great pleasure.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-7-24" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-07-24">14th</time>. Up a little late, last night recovering my sleepiness for the night before, which was lost, and so to my office to put papers and things to right, and making up my journal from Wednesday last to this day. All the morning at my office doing of business; at noon <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hunt came to me, and he and I to the Exchange, and a Coffee House, and drank there, and thence to my house to dinner, whither my uncle Thomas came, and he tells me that he is going down to Wisbech, there to try what he can recover of my uncle Day’s estate, and seems to have good arguments for what he do go about, in which I wish him good speed. I made him almost foxed, the poor man having but a bad head, and not used I believe nowadays to drink much wine. So after dinner, they being gone, I to my office, and so home to bed. This day I hear the judges, according to order yesterday, did bring into the Lords’ House their reasons of their judgment in the business between my Lord Bristoll and the Chancellor; and the Lords do concur with the Judges that the articles are not treason, nor regularly brought into the House, and so voted that a Committee should be chosen to examine them; but nothing to be done therein till the next sitting of this Parliament (which is like to be adjourned in a day or two), and in the meantime the two Lords to, remain without prejudice done to either of them.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-7-25" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-07-25">15th</time>. Up and all the morning at the office, among other things with Cooper the Purveyor, whose dullness in his proceeding in his work I was vexed at, and find that though he understands it may be as much as other men that profess skill in timber, yet I perceive that many things, they do by rote, and very dully. Thence home to dinner, whither Captain Grove came and dined with me, he going into the country today; among other discourse he told me of discourse very much to my honour, both as to my care and ability, happening at the Duke of Albemarle’s table the other day, both from the Duke, and the Duchess themselves; and how I paid so much a year to him whose place it was of right, and that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry did report thus of me; which was greatly to my content, knowing how against their minds I was brought into the Navy. Thence by water to Westminster, and there spent a good deal of time walking in the Hall, which is going to be repaired, and, God forgive me, had a mind to have got <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lane abroad, or fallen in with any woman else (in that hot humour). But it so happened she could not go out, nor I meet with anybody else, and so I walked homeward, and in my way did many and great businesses of my own at the Temple among my lawyers and others to my great content, thanking God that I did not fall into any company to occasion spending time and money. To supper, and then to a little viol and to bed, sporting in my fancy with the Queen.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-7-26" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-07-26">16th</time>. Up and dispatched things into the country and to my father’s, and two kegs of Sturgeon and a dozen bottles of wine to Cambridge for my cousin Roger Pepys, which I give him. By and by down by water on several Dealel ships, and stood upon a stage in one place seeing caulkers sheathing of a ship. Then at Wapping to my carver’s about my Viol head. So home, and thence to my Viol maker’s in Bishopsgate Street; his name is Wise, who is a pretty fellow at it. Thence to the Exchange, and so home to dinner, and then to my office, where a full board, and busy all the afternoon, and among other things made a great contract with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Warren for 40,000 deals Swinsound, at £3 17<abbr>s.</abbr> 0<abbr>d.</abbr> per hundred. In the morning before I went on the water I was at Thames Street about some pitch, and there meeting Anthony Joyce, I took him and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Stacy, the Tar merchant, to the tavern, where Stacy told me many old stories of my Lady Batten’s former poor condition, and how her former husband broke, and how she came to her state. At night, after office done, I went to Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten’s, where my Lady and I [had] some high words about emptying our house of office, where I did tell her my mind, and at last agreed that it should be done through my office, and so all well. So home to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-7-27" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-07-27">17th</time>. Up, and after doing some business at my office, Creed came to me, and I took him to my viol maker’s, and there I heard the famous <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Stefkins<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1870" id="noteref-1870" epub:type="noteref">1870</a> play admirably well, and yet I found it as it is always, I over expected. I took him to the tavern and found him a temperate sober man, at least he seems so to me. I commit the direction of my viol to him. Thence to the ’Change, and so home, Creed and I to dinner, and after dinner Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Warren came to me, and he and I in my closet about his last night’s contract, and from thence to discourse of measuring of timber, wherein I made him see that I could understand the matter well, and did both learn of and teach him something. Creed being gone through my staying talking to him so long, I went alone by water down to Redriffe, and so to sit and talk with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn, where I did speak very plainly concerning my thoughts of Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Carteret and Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes. So as it may cost me some trouble if he should tell them again, but he said as much or more to me concerning them both, which I may remember if ever it should come forth, and nothing but what is true and my real opinion of them, that they neither do understand to this day Creed’s accounts, nor do deserve to be employed in their places without better care, but that the King had better give them greater salaries to stand still and do nothing. Thence coming home I was saluted by Bagwell and his wife (the woman I have a kindness for), and they would have me into their little house, which I was willing enough to, and did salute his wife. They had got wine for me, and I perceive live prettily, and I believe the woman a virtuous modest woman. Her husband walked through to Redriffe with me, telling me things that I asked of in the yard, and so by water home, it being likely to rain again tonight, which God forbid. To supper and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-7-28" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-07-28">18th</time>. Up and to my office, where all the morning, and Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes and I did a little, and but a little business at the office. So I eat a bit of victuals at home, and so abroad to several places, as my bookseller’s, and then to Thomson the instrument maker’s to bespeak a ruler for my pocket for timber, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, which I believe he will do to my mind. So to the Temple, Wardrobe, and lastly to Westminster Hall, where I expected some bands made me by <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lane, and while she went to the starchers for them, I stayed at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Howlett’s, who with her husband were abroad, and only their daughter (which I call my wife) was in the shop, and I took occasion to buy a pair of gloves to talk to her, and I find her a pretty spoken girl, and will prove a mighty handsome wench. I could love her very well. By and by <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lane comes, and my bands not being done she and I posted and met at the Crown in the Palace Yard, where we eat a chicken I sent for, and drank, and were mighty merry, and I had my full liberty of towzing her and doing what I would, but the last thing of all.⁠ ⁠… Of which I am heartily ashamed, but I do resolve never to do more so. But, Lord! to see what a mind she has to a husband, and how she showed me her hands to tell her her fortune, and everything that she asked ended always whom and when she was to marry. And I pleased her so well, saying as I know she would have me, and then she would say that she had been with all the artists in town, and they always told her the same things, as that she should live long, and rich, and have a good husband, but few children, and a great fit of sickness, and 20 other things, which she says she has always been told by others. Here I stayed late before my bands were done, and then they came, and so I by water to the Temple, and thence walked home, all in a sweat with my tumbling of her and walking, and so a little supper and to bed, fearful of having taken cold.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-7-29" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-07-29">19th (Lord’s day)</time>. Lay very long in pleasant dreams till Church time, and so up, and it being foul weather so that I cannot walk as I intended to meet my Cousin Roger at Thomas Pepys’s house (whither he rode last night), to Hatcham, I went to church, where a sober Doctor made a good sermon. So home to dinner alone, and then to read a little, and so to church again, where the Scot made an ordinary sermon, and so home to my office, and there read over my vows and increased them by a vow against all strong drink till November next of any sort or quantity, by which I shall try how I can forbear it. God send it may not prejudice my health, and then I care not. Then I fell to read over a silly play writ by a person of honour (which is, I find, as much as to say a coxcomb), called <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Love à la Mode</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1871" id="noteref-1871" epub:type="noteref">1871</a> and that being ended, home, and played on my lute and sung psalms till bedtime, then to prayers and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-7-30" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-07-30">20th</time>. Up and to my office, and then walked to Woolwich, reading Bacon’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Faber Fortunæ</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1872" id="noteref-1872" epub:type="noteref">1872</a> which the oftener I read the more I admire. There found Captain Cocke, and up and down to many places to look after matters, and so walked back again with him to his house, and there dined very finely. With much ado obtained an excuse from drinking of wine, and did only taste a drop of Sack which he had for his lady, who is, he fears, a little consumptive, and her beauty begins to want its colour. It was Malago Sack, which, he says, is certainly 30 years old, and I tasted a drop of it, and it was excellent wine, like a spirit rather than wine. Thence by water to the office, and taking some papers by water to Whitehall and <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s, but there being no meeting with the Duke today, I returned by water and down to Greenwich, to look after some blocks that I saw a load carried off by a cart from Woolwich, the King’s Yard. But I could not find them, and so returned, and being heartily weary I made haste to bed, and being in bed made Will read and construe three or four Latin verses in the Bible, and chide him for forgetting his grammar. So to sleep, and sleep ill all the night, being so weary, and feverish with it.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-7-31" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-07-31">21st</time>. And so lay long in the morning, till I heard people knock at my door, and I took it to be about 8 o’clock (but afterwards found myself a little mistaken), and so I rose and ranted at Will and the maid, and swore I could find my heart to kick them down stairs, which the maid mumbled at mightily. It was my brother, who stayed and talked with me, his chief business being about his going about to build his house new at the top, which will be a great charge for him, and above his judgment. By and by comes <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Deane, of Woolwich, with his draught of a ship, and the bend and main lines in the body of a ship very finely, and which do please me mightily, and so am resolved to study hard, and learn of him to understand a body, and I find him a very pretty fellow in it, and rational, but a little conceited, but that’s no matter to me. At noon, by my Lady Batten’s desire, I went over the water to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Castle’s, who brings his wife home to his own house today, where I found a great many good old women, and my Lady, Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten, and Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes. A good, handsome, plain dinner, and then walked in the garden; which is pleasant enough, more than I expected there, and so Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes, Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten, and I by water to the office, and there sat, and then I by water to the Temple about my law business, and back again home and wrote letters to my father and wife about my desire that they should observe the feast at Brampton, and have my Lady and the family, and so home to supper and bed, my head aching all the day from my last night’s bad rest, and yesterday’s distempering myself with over walking, and today knocking my head against a low door in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Castle’s house. This day the Parliament kept a fast for the present unseasonable weather.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-8-1" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-08-01">22nd</time>. Up, and by and by comes my uncle Thomas, to whom I paid £10 for his last half year’s annuity, and did get his and his son’s hand and seal for the confirming to us Piggott’s mortgage, which was forgot to be expressed in our late agreement with him, though intended, and therefore they might have cavilled at it, if they would. Thence abroad calling at several places upon some errands, among others to my brother Tom’s barber and had my hair cut, while his boy played on the violin, a plain boy, but has a very good genius, and understands the book very well, but to see what a shift he made for a string of red silk was very pleasant. Thence to my Lord Crew’s. My Lord not being come home, I met and stayed below with Captain Ferrers, who was come to wait upon my Lady Jemimah to <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s, she being one of the four ladies that hold up the mantle at the christening this afternoon of the Duke’s child (a boy). In discourse of the ladies at Court, Captain Ferrers tells me that my Lady Castlemaine is now as great again as ever she was; and that her going away was only a fit of her own upon some slighting words of the King, so that she called for her coach at a quarter of an hour’s warning, and went to Richmond; and the King the next morning, under pretence of going a-hunting, went to see her and make friends, and never was a-hunting at all. After which she came back to Court, and commands the King as much as ever, and hath and doth what she will. No longer ago than last night, there was a private entertainment made for the King and Queen at the Duke of Buckingham’s, and she was not invited: but being at my Lady Suffolk’s,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1873" id="noteref-1873" epub:type="noteref">1873</a> her aunt’s (where my Lady Jemimah and Lord Sandwich dined) yesterday, she was heard to say, “Well; much good may it do them, and for all that I will be as merry as they:” and so she went home and caused a great supper to be prepared. And after the King had been with the Queen at Wallingford House,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1874" id="noteref-1874" epub:type="noteref">1874</a> he came to my Lady Castlemaine’s, and was there all night, and my Lord Sandwich with him, which was the reason my Lord lay in town all night, which he has not done a great while before. He tells me he believes that, as soon as the King can get a husband for <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Stewart however, my Lady Castlemaine’s nose will be out of joint; for that she comes to be in great esteem, and is more handsome than she. I found by his words that my Lord Sandwich finds some pleasure in the country where he now is, whether he means one of the daughters of the house or no I know not, but hope the contrary, that he thinks he is very well pleased with staying there, but yet upon breaking up of the Parliament, which the King by a message today says shall be on Monday next, he resolves to go. Ned Pickering, the coxcomb, notwithstanding all his hopes of my Lord’s assistance, wherein I am sorry to hear my Lord has much concerned himself, is defeated of the place he expected under the Queen. He came hither by and by and brought some jewells for my Lady <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Jem.</abbr> to put on, with which and her other clothes she looks passing well. I stayed and dined with my Lord Crew, who whether he was not so well pleased with me as he used to be, or that his head was full of business, as I believe it was, he hardly spoke one word to me all dinner time, we dining alone, only young Jack Crew, Sir Thomas’s son, with us. After dinner I bade him farewell. Sir Thomas I hear has gone this morning ill to bed, so I had no mind to see him. Thence homewards, and in the way first called at Wotton’s, the shoemaker’s, who tells me the reason of Harris’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1875" id="noteref-1875" epub:type="noteref">1875</a> going from Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Wm.</abbr> Davenant’s house, that he grew very proud and demanded £20 for himself extraordinary, more than Betterton or anybody else, upon every new play, and £10 upon every revive; which with other things Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Davenant would not give him, and so he swore he would never act there more, in expectation of being received in the other House; but the King will not suffer it, upon Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Davenant’s desire that he would not, for then he might shut up house, and that is true. He tells me that his going is at present a great loss to the House, and that he fears he hath a stipend from the other House privately. He tells the that the fellow grew very proud of late, the King and everybody else crying him up so high, and that above Betterton, he being a more ayery man, as he is indeed. But yet Betterton, he says, they all say do act: some parts that none but himself can do. Thence to my bookseller’s, and found my Waggoners done. The very binding cost me 14<abbr>s.</abbr>, but they are well done, and so with a porter home with them, and so by water to Ratcliff, and there went to speak with Cumberford the plat-maker, and there saw his manner of working, which is very fine and laborious. So down to Deptford, reading Ben Jonson’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Devil Is an Asse</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1876" id="noteref-1876" epub:type="noteref">1876</a> and so to see Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn, who I find walking out of doors a little, but could not stand long; but in doors and I with him, and stayed a great while talking, I taking a liberty to tell him my thoughts in things of the office; that when he comes abroad again, he may know what to think of me, and to value me as he ought. Walked home as I used to do, and being weary, and after some discourse with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Barrow, who came to see and take his leave of me, he being tomorrow to set out toward the Isle of Man, I went to bed. This day I hear that the Moores have made some attacks upon the outworks of Tangier; but my Lord Tiviott; with the loss of about 200 men, did beat them off, and killed many of them. Tomorrow the King and Queen for certain go down to Tunbridge. But the King comes hack again against Monday to raise the Parliament.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-8-2" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-08-02">23rd</time>. Up and to my office, and thence by information from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ackworth I went down to Woolwich, and mustered the three East India ships that lie there, believing that there is great-juggling between the Pursers and Clerks of the Cheque in cheating the King of the wages and victuals of men that do not give attendance, and I found very few on board. So to the yard, and there mustered the yard, and found many faults, and discharged several fellows that were absent from their business. I stayed also at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ackworth’s desire at dinner with him and his wife, and there was a simple fellow, a gentleman I believe of the Court, their kinsmen, that threatened me I could have little discourse or begin, acquaintance with Ackworth’s wife, and so after dinner away, with all haste home, and there found Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes and Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten at the office, and by Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten’s testimony and Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Carteret’s concurrence was forced to consent to a business of Captain Cocke’s timber, as bad as anything we have lately disputed about, and all through <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry’s not being with us. So up and to supper with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten upon a soused mullet, very good meat, and so home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-8-3" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-08-03">24th</time>. Up pretty early (though of late I have been faulty by an hour or two every morning of what I should do) and by water to the Temple, and there took leave of my cousin Roger Pepys, who goes out of town today. So to Westminster Hall, and there at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Michell’s shop sent for beer and sugar and drink, and made great cheer with it among her and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Howlett, her neighbour, and their daughters, especially <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Howlett’s daughter, Betty, which is a pretty girl, and one I have long called wife, being, I formerly thought, like my own wife. After this good neighbourhood, which I do to give them occasion of speaking well and commending me in some company that now and then I know comes to their shop, I went to the Six clerks’ office,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1877" id="noteref-1877" epub:type="noteref">1877</a> and there had a writ for Tom Trice, and paid 20<abbr>s.</abbr> for it to Wilkinson, and so up and down to many places, among others to the viol maker’s, and there saw the head, which now pleases me mightily, and so home, and being sent for presently to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bland’s, where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Povy and Gauden and I were invited to dinner, which we had very finely and great plenty, but for drink, though many and good, I drank nothing but small beer and water, which I drank so much that I wish it may not do me hurt. They had a kinswoman, they call daughter, in the house, a short, ugly, red-haired slut, that plays upon the virginalls, and sings, but after such a country manner I was weary of it, but yet could not but commend it. So by and by after dinner comes <abbr>Monsr.</abbr> Gotier, who is beginning to teach her, but, Lord! what a droll fellow it is to make her hold open her mouth, and telling this and that so drolly would make a man burst, but himself I perceive sings very well. Anon we sat down again to a collacon of cheesecakes, tarts, custards, and suchlike, very handsome, and so up and away home, where I at the office a while, till disturbed by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hill, of Cambridge, with whom I walked in the garden a while, and thence home and then in my dining room walked, talking of several matters of state till 11 at night, giving him a glass of wine. I was not unwilling to hear him talk, though he is full of words, yet a man of large conversation, especially among the Presbyters and Independents; he tells me that certainly, let the Bishops alone, and they will ruin themselves, and he is confident that the King’s declaration about two years since will be the foundation of the settlement of the Church some time or other, for the King will find it hard to banish all those that will appear Nonconformists upon this Act that is coming out against them. He being gone, I to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-8-4" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-08-04">25th</time>. Up and to my office setting papers in order for these two or three days, in which I have been hindered a little, and then having intended this day to go to Banstead Downs to see a famous race, I sent Will to get himself ready to go with me, and I also by and by home and put on my riding suit, and being ready came to the office to Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes and Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten, and did a little of course at the office this morning, and so by boat to Whitehall, where I hear that the race is put off, because the Lords do sit in Parliament today.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1878" id="noteref-1878" epub:type="noteref">1878</a> However, having appointed <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed to come to me to Fox Hall,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1879" id="noteref-1879" epub:type="noteref">1879</a> I went over thither, and after some debate, Creed and I resolved to go to Clapham, to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gauden’s,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1880" id="noteref-1880" epub:type="noteref">1880</a> who had sent his coach to their place for me because I was to have my horse of him to go to the race. So I went thither by coach and my Will by horse with me; <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed he went over back again to Westminster to fetch his horse. When I came to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gauden’s one first thing was to show me his house, which is almost built, wherein he and his family live. I find it very regular and finely contrived, and the gardens and offices about it as convenient and as full of good variety as ever I saw in my life. It is true he hath been censured for laying out so much money; but he tells me that he built it for his brother, who is since dead (the Bishop),<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1881" id="noteref-1881" epub:type="noteref">1881</a> who when he should come to be Bishop of Winchester, which he was promised (to which bishoprick at present there is no house), he did intend to dwell here.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1882" id="noteref-1882" epub:type="noteref">1882</a> Besides, with the good husbandry in making his bricks and other things I do not think it costs him so much money as people think and discourse. By and by to dinner, and in comes <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed. I saluted <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gauden’s lady, and the young ladies, he having many pretty children, and his sister, the Bishop’s widow; who was, it seems, Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Russel’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1883" id="noteref-1883" epub:type="noteref">1883</a> daughter, the Treasurer of the Navy; who by her discourse at dinner I find to be very well-bred, and a woman of excellent discourse, even so much as to have my attention all dinner with much more pleasure than I did give to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed, whose discourse was mighty merry in inveighing at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gauden’s victuals that they had at sea the last voyage that he prosecuted, till methought the woman began to take it seriously. After dinner by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gauden’s motion we got <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gauden and her sister to sing to a viol, on which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gauden’s eldest son (a pretty man, but a simple one methinks) played but very poorly, and the music bad, but yet I commended it. Only I do find that the ladies have been taught to sing and do sing well now, but that the viol puts them out. I took the viol and played some things from one of their books, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lyra Lessons</i>, which they seemed to like well. Thus we pass an hour or two after dinner and towards the evening we bade them Adieu! and took horse; being resolved that, instead of the race which fails us, we would go to Epsum. So we set out, and being gone a little way I sent home Will to look to the house, and Creed and I rode forward; the road being full of citizens going and coming toward Epsum, where, when we came, we could hear of no lodging, the town so full; but which was better, I went towards Ashted,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1884" id="noteref-1884" epub:type="noteref">1884</a> my old place of pleasure; and there by direction of one goodman Arthur, whom we met on the way, we went to Farmer Page’s, at which direction he and I made good sport, and there we got a lodging in a little hole we could not stand upright in, but rather than go further to look we stayed there, and while supper was getting ready I took him to walk up and down behind my cousin Pepys’s house that was, which I find comes little short of what I took it to be when I was a little boy, as things use commonly to appear greater than then when one comes to be a man and knows more, and so up and down in the closes, which I know so well methinks, and account it good fortune that I lie here that I may have opportunity to renew my old walks. It seems there is one <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rouse, they call him the Queen’s Tailor, that lives there now. So to our lodging to supper, and among other meats had a brave dish of cream, the best I ever eat in my life, and with which we pleased ourselves much, and by and by to bed, where, with much ado yet good sport, we made shift to lie, but with little ease, and a little spaniel by us, which has followed us all the way, a pretty dog, and we believe that follows my horse, and do belong to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gauden, which we, therefore, are very careful of.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-8-5" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-08-05">26th (Lord’s-day)</time>. Up and to the Wells,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1885" id="noteref-1885" epub:type="noteref">1885</a> where great store of citizens, which was the greatest part of the company, though there were some others of better quality. I met many that I knew, and we drank each of us two pots and so walked away, it being very pleasant to see how everybody turns up his tail, here one and there another, in a bush, and the women in their quarters the like. Thence I walked with Creed to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Minnes’s house, which has now a very good way made to it, and thence to Durdans and walked round it and within the Court Yard and to the Bowling-green, where I have seen so much mirth in my time; but now no family in it (my Lord Barkeley, whose it is, being with his family at London), and so up and down by Minnes’s wood, with great pleasure viewing my old walks, and where <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hely and I did use to walk and talk, with whom I had the first sentiments of love and pleasure in woman’s company, discourse, and taking her by the hand, she being a pretty woman. So I led him to Ashted Church (by the place where Peter, my cousin’s man, went blindfold and found a certain place we chose for him upon a wager), where we had a dull Doctor, one Downe, worse than I think even parson King was, of whom we made so much scorn, and after sermon home, and stayed while our dinner, a couple of large chickens, were dressed, and a good mess of cream, which anon we had with good content, and after dinner (we taking no notice of other lodgers in the house, though there was one that I knew, and knew and spoke to me, one <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rider, a merchant), he and I to walk, and I led him to the pretty little wood behind my cozens house, into which we got at last by clambering, and our little dog with us, but when we were among the hazel trees and bushes, Lord! what a course did we run for an hour together, losing ourselves, and indeed I despaired I should ever come to any path, but still from thicket to thicket, a thing I could hardly have believed a man could have been lost so long in so small a room. At last I found out a delicate walk in the middle that goes quite through the wood, and then went out of the wood, and holloed <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed, and made him hunt me from place to place, and at last went in and called him into my fine walk, the little dog still hunting with us through the wood. In this walk being all bewildered and weary and sweating, Creed he lay down upon the ground, which I did a little, but I durst not long, but walked from him in the fine green walk, which is half a mile long, there reading my vows as I used to on Sundays. And after that was done, and going and lying by Creed an hour, he and I rose and went to our lodging and paid our reckoning, and so mounted, whether to go toward London home or to find a new lodging, and so rode through Epsum, the whole town over, seeing the various companies that were there walking; which was very pleasant to see how they are there without knowing almost what to do, but only in the morning to drink waters. But, Lord! to see how many I met there of citizens, that I could not have thought to have seen there, or that they had ever had it in their heads or purses to go down thither. We rode out of the town through Yowell<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1886" id="noteref-1886" epub:type="noteref">1886</a> beyond Nonesuch House<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1887" id="noteref-1887" epub:type="noteref">1887</a> a mile, and there our little dog, as he used to do, fell a-running after a flock of sheep feeding on the common, till he was out of sight, and then endeavoured to come back again, and went to the last gate that he parted with us at, and there the poor thing mistakes our scent, instead of coming forward he hunts us backward, and runs as hard as he could drive back towards Nonesuch, Creed and I after him, and being by many told of his going that way and the haste he made, we rode still and passed him through Yowell, and there we lost any further information of him. However, we went as far as Epsum almost, hearing nothing of him, we went back to Yowell, and there was told that he did pass through the town. We rode back to Nonesuch to see whether he might be gone back again, but hearing nothing we with great trouble and discontent for the loss of our dog came back once more to Yowell, and there set up our horses and selves for all night, employing people to look for the dog in the town, but can hear nothing of him. However, we gave order for supper, and while that was dressing walked out through Nonesuch Park to the house, and there viewed as much as we could of the outside, and looked through the great gates, and found a noble court; and altogether believe it to have been a very noble house, and a delicate park about it, where just now there was a doe killed, for the King to carry up to Court. So walked back again, and by and by our supper being ready, a good leg of mutton boiled, we supped and to bed, upon two beds in the same room, wherein we slept most excellently all night.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-8-6" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-08-06">27th</time>. Up in the morning about 7 o’clock, and after a little study, resolved of riding to the Wells to look for our dog, which we did, but could hear nothing; but it being much a warmer day than yesterday there was great store of gallant company, more than then, to my greater pleasure. There was at a distance, under one of the trees on the common, a company got together that sung. I, at the distance, and so all the rest being a quarter of a mile off, took them for the Waytes, so I rode up to them, and found them only voices, some citizens met by chance, that sung four or five parts excellently. I have not been more pleased with a snapp of music, considering the circumstances of the time and place, in all my life anything so pleasant. We drank each of us, three cupps, and so, after riding up to the horsemen upon the hill, where they were making of matches to run, we went away and to Yowell, where we found our breakfast, the remains of our supper last night hashed, and by and by, after the smith had set on two new shoes to Creed’s horse, we mounted, and with little discourse, I being intent upon getting home in time, we rode hard home, observing <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gauden’s house, but not calling there (it being too late for me to stay, and wanting their dog too). The house stands very finely, and has a graceful view to the highway. Set up our horses at Fox Hall, and I by water (observing the King’s barge attending his going to the House this day) home, it being about one o’clock. So got myself ready and shifting myself, and so by water to Westminster, and there came most luckily to the Lords’ House as the House of Commons were going into the Lord’s House, and there I crowded in along with the Speaker, and got to stand close behind him, where he made his speech to the King (who sat with his crown on and robes, and so all the Lords in their robes, a fine sight); wherein he told his Majesty what they have done this Parliament, and now offered for his royal consent. The greatest matters were a bill for the Lord’s day (which it seems the Lords have lost, and so cannot be passed, at which the Commons are displeased); the bills against Conventicles and Papists (but it seems the Lords have not passed them), and giving his Majesty four entire subsidies; which last, with about twenty smaller Acts, were passed with this form: The Clerk of the House reads the title of the bill, and then looks at the end and there finds (writ by the King I suppose) “<i xml:lang="fr">Le Roy le veult</i>,” and that he reads. And to others he reads, “<i xml:lang="fr">Soit fait comme vous desirez.</i>” And to the Subsidies, as well that for the Commons, I mean the layety, as for the Clergy, the King writes, “<i xml:lang="fr">Le Roy remerciant les Seigneurs, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, Prelats, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, accepte leur benevolences.</i>” The Speaker’s<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1888" id="noteref-1888" epub:type="noteref">1888</a> speech was far from any oratory, but was as plain (though good matter) as anything could be, and void of elocution. After the bills passed, the King, sitting on his throne, with his speech writ in a paper which he held in his lap, and scarce looked off of it, I thought, all the time he made his speech to them, giving them thanks for their subsidies, of which, had he not need, he would not have asked or received them; and that need, not from any extravagancies of his, he was sure, in anything, but the disorders of the times compelling him to be at greater charge than he hoped for the future, by their care in their country, he should be: and that for his family expenses and others, he would labour however to retrench in many things convenient, and would have all others to do so too. He desired that nothing of old faults should be remembered, or severity for the same used to any in the country, it being his desire to have all forgot as well as forgiven. But, however, to use all care in suppressing any tumults, <abbr>etc.</abbr>; assuring them that the restless spirits of his and their adversaries have great expectations of something to be done this summer. And promised that though the Acts about Conventicles and Papists were not ripe for passing this Session, yet he would take care himself that neither of them should in this intervall be encouraged to the endangering of the peace; and that at their next meeting he would himself prepare two bills for them concerning them. So he concluded, that for the better proceeding of justice he did think fit to make this a Session, and to prorogue them to the 16th of March next. His speech was very plain, nothing at all of spirit in it, nor spoke with any; but rather on the contrary imperfectly, repeating many times his words though he read all which I was sorry to see, it having not been hard for him to have got all the speech without book. So they all went away, the King out of the House at the upper end, he being by and by to go to Tunbridge to the Queen; and I in the Painted Chamber spoke with my Lord Sandwich while he was putting off his robes, who tells me he will now hasten down into the country, as soon as he can get some money settled on the Wardrobe. Here meeting Creed, he and I down to the Hall, and I having at Michell’s shop wrote a little letter to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gauden, to go with his horse, and excusing my not taking leave or so much as asking after the old lady the widow when we came away the other day from them, he and I over the water to Fox Hall, and there sent away the horse with my letter, and then to the new Spring Garden, walking up and down, but things being dear and little attendance to be had we went away, leaving much brave company there, and so to a less house hard by, where we liked very well their Codlin tarts, having not time, as we intended, to stay the getting ready of a dish of peas. And there came to us an idle boy to show us some tumbling tricks, which he did very well, and the greatest bending of his body that ever I observed in my life. Thence by water to Whitehall, and walked over the Park to <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s; but missed <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry, he not being within; and so out again, and there the Duke was coming along the Pell-Mell. It being a little darkish, I stayed not to take notice of him, but we went directly back again. And in our walk over the Park, one of the Duke’s footmen came running behind us, and came looking just in our faces to see who we were, and went back again. What his meaning is I know not, but was fearful that I might not go far enough with my hat off, though methinks that should not be it, besides, there were others covered nearer than myself was, but only it was my fear. So to Whitehall and by water to the Bridge, and so home to bed, weary and well pleased with my journey in all respects. Only it cost me about 20<abbr>s.</abbr>, but it was for my health, and I hope will prove so, only I do find by my riding a little swelling to rise just by my anus. I had the same the last time I rode, and then it fell again, and now it is up again about the bigness of the bag of a silkworm, makes me fearful of a rupture. But I will speak to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hollyard about it, and I am glad to find it now, that I may prevent it before it goes too far.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-8-7" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-08-07">28th</time>. Up after sleeping very well, and so to my office setting down the Journall of this last three days, and so settled to business again, I hope with greater cheerfulness and success by this refreshment. At the office all the morning, and at noon to Wise’s about my viol that is a-doing, and so home to dinner and then to the office, where we sat all the afternoon till night, and I late at it till after the office was risen. Late came my Jane and her brother Will to entreat for my taking of the boy again, but I will not hear her, though I would yet be glad to do anything for her sake to the boy, but receive him again I will not, nor give him anything. She would have me send him to sea; which if I could I would do, but there is no ship going out. The poor girl cried all the time she was with me, and would not go from me, staying about two hours with me till 10 or 11 o’clock, expecting that she might obtain something of me, but receive him I will not. So the poor girl was fain to go away crying and saying little. So from thence home, where my house of office was emptying, and I find they will do it with much more cleanness than I expected. I went up and down among them a good while, but knowing that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry was to call me in the morning, I went to bed and left them to look after the people. So to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-8-8" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-08-08">29th</time>. Up about 6 o’clock, and found the people to have just done, and Hannah not gone to bed yet, but was making clean of the yard and kitchen. Will newly gone to bed. So I to my office, and having given some order to Tom Hater, to whom I gave leave for his recreation to go down to Portsmouth this Pay, I went down to Wapping to Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Warren, and there stayed an hour or two discoursing of some of his goods and then things in general relating to this office, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, and so home, and there going to Sir William Batten (having no stomach to dine at home, it being yet hardly clean of last night’s [mess]) and there I dined with my Lady and her daughter and son Castle,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1889" id="noteref-1889" epub:type="noteref">1889</a> and mighty kind she is and I kind to her, but, Lord! how freely and plainly she rails against Commissioner Pett, calling him rogue, and wondering that the King keeps such a fellow in the Navy. Thence by and by walked to see Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn at Deptford, reading by the way a most ridiculous play, a new one, called <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Politician Cheated</i>.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1890" id="noteref-1890" epub:type="noteref">1890</a> After a little sitting with him I walked to the yard a little and so home again, my Will with me, whom I bade to stay in the yard for me, and so to bed. This morning my brother Tom was with me, and we had some discourse again concerning his country mistress, but I believe the most that is fit for us to condescend to, will not content her friends.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-8-9" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-08-09">30th</time>. Up and to the office to get business ready for our sitting, this being the first day of altering it from afternoon during the Parliament sitting to the forenoon again. By and by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry only came (Sir John Minnes and Sir William Batten being gone this morning to Portsmouth to pay some ships and the yard there), and after doing a little business he and I down to Woolwich, and there up and down the yard, and by and by came Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Carteret and we all looked into matters, and then by water back to Deptford, where we dined with him at his house, a very good dinner and mightily tempted with wines of all sorts and brave French Syder, but I drunk none. But that which is a great wonder I find his little daughter Betty,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1891" id="noteref-1891" epub:type="noteref">1891</a> that was in hanging sleeves but a month or two ago, and is a very little young child; married, and to whom, but to young Scott,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1892" id="noteref-1892" epub:type="noteref">1892</a> son to Madam Catharine Scott,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1893" id="noteref-1893" epub:type="noteref">1893</a> that was so long in law, and at whose triall I was with her husband; he pleading that it was unlawfuly got and would not own it, she, it seems, being brought to bed of it, if not got by somebody else at Oxford, but it seems a little before his death he did own the child, and hath left him his estate, not long since. So Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Carteret hath struck up of a sudden a match with him for his little daughter. He hath about £2,000 per annum; and it seems Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Carteret hath by this means overreached Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Bennet, who did endeavour to get this gentleman for a sister of his, but Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Carteret I say has overreached him. By this means Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Carteret hath married two daughters this year both very well.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1894" id="noteref-1894" epub:type="noteref">1894</a> After dinner into Deptford yard, but our bellies being full we could do no great business, and so parted, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry and I to Whitehall by water, where we also parted, and I to several places about business, and so calling for my five books of the Variorum print bound according to my common binding instead of the other which is more gaudy I went home. The town talk this day is of nothing but the great footrace run this day on Banstead Downs, between Lee, the Duke of Richmond’s footman, and a tyler, a famous runner. And Lee hath beat him; though the King and Duke of York and all men almost did bet three or four to one upon the tyler’s head.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1663-8-10" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1663-08-10">31st</time>. Up early to my accounts this month, and I find myself worth clear £730, the most I ever had yet, which contents me though I increase but very little. Thence to my office doing business, and at noon to my viol maker’s, who has begun it and has a good appearance, and so to the Exchange, where I met <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Pierce, who tells me of his good luck to get to be groom of the Privy-Chamber to the Queen, and without my Lord Sandwich’s help; but only by his good fortune, meeting a man that hath let him have his right for a small matter, about £60, for which he can every day have £400. But he tells me my Lord hath lost much honour in standing so long and so much for that coxcomb Pickering, and at last not carrying it for him; but hath his name struck out by the King and Queen themselves after he had been in ever since the Queen’s coming. But he tells me he believes that either Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H.</abbr> Bennet, my Lady Castlemaine, or Sir Charles Barkeley had received some money for the place, and so the King could not disappoint them, but was forced to put out this fool rather than a better man. And I am sorry to hear what he tells me that Sir Charles Barkeley hath still such power over the King, as to be able to fetch him from the Council-table to my Lady Castlemaine when he pleases. He tells me also, as a friend, the great injury that he thinks I do myself by being so severe in the Yards, and contracting the ill-will of the whole Navy for those offices, singly upon myself. Now I discharge a good conscience therein, and I tell him that no man can (nor do he say any say it) charge me with doing wrong; but rather do as many good offices as any man. They think, he says, that I have a mind to get a good name with the King and Duke, who he tells me do not consider any such thing; but I shall have as good thanks to let all alone, and do as the rest. But I believe the contrary; and yet I told him I never go to the Duke alone, as others do, to talk of my own services. However, I will make use of his council, and take some course to prevent having the single ill-will of the office. Before I went to the office I went to the Coffee House, where Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Cutler and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Grant were, and there <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Grant showed me letters of Sir William Petty’s, wherein he says, that his vessel which he hath built upon two keeles<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1895" id="noteref-1895" epub:type="noteref">1895</a> (a modell whereof, built for the King, he showed me) hath this month won a wager of £50 in sailing between Dublin and Holyhead with the packet-boat, the best ship or vessel the King hath there; and he offers to lay with any vessel in the world. It is about thirty ton in burden, and carries thirty men, with good accommodation (as much more as any ship of her burden), and so any vessel of this figure shall carry more men, with better accommodation by half, than any other ship. This carries also ten guns, of about five tons weight. In their coming back from Holyhead they started together, and this vessel came to Dublin by five at night, and the packet-boat not before eight the next morning; and when they came they did believe that, this vessel had been drowned, or at least behind, not thinking she could have lived in that sea. Strange things are told of this vessel, and he concludes his letter with this position, “I only affirm that the perfection of sailing lies in my principle, finde it out who can.” Thence home, in my way meeting <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rawlinson, who tells me that my uncle Wight is off of his Hampshire purchase and likes less of the Wights, and would have me to be kind and study to please him, which I am resolved to do. Being at home he sent for me to dinner to meet <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore, so I went thither and dined well, but it was strange for me to refuse, and yet I did without any reluctancy to drink wine in a tavern, where nothing else almost was drunk, and that excellent good. Thence with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore to the Wardrobe, and there sat while my Lord was private with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Townsend about his accounts an hour or two, we reading of a merry book against the Presbyters called <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Cabbala</i>,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1896" id="noteref-1896" epub:type="noteref">1896</a> extraordinary witty. Thence walked home and to my office, setting papers of all sorts and writing letters and putting myself into a condition to go to Chatham with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry tomorrow. So, at almost 12 o’clock, and my eyes tired with seeing to write, I went home and to bed. Ending the month with pretty good content of mind, my wife in the country and myself in good esteem, and likely by pains to become considerable, I think, with God’s blessing upon my diligence.</p>
			</article>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
