<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>April 1664</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-52" epub:type="chapter z3998:diary">
			<h2 epub:type="title">April 1664</h2>
			<article id="entry-1664-4-11" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1664-04-11">April 1st</time>. Up and to my office, where busy till noon, and then to the ’Change, where I found all the merchants concerned with the presenting their complaints to the Committee of Parliament appointed to receive them this afternoon against the Dutch. So home to dinner, and thence by coach, setting my wife down at the New Exchange, I to Whitehall; and coming too soon for the Tangier Committee walked to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blagrave for a song. I left long ago there, and here I spoke with his kinswoman, he not being within, but did not hear her sing, being not enough acquainted with her, but would be glad to have her, to come and be at my house a week now and then. Back to Whitehall, and in the Gallery met the Duke of York (I also saw the Queen going to the Park, and her Maids of Honour: she herself looks ill, and methinks <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Stewart is grown fatter, and not so fair as she was); and he called me to him, and discoursed a good while with me; and after he was gone, twice or thrice stayed and called me again to him, the whole length of the house: and at last talked of the Dutch; and I perceive do much wish that the Parliament will find reason to fall out with them. He gone, I by and by found that the Committee of Tangier met at the Duke of Albemarle’s, and so I have lost my labour. So with Creed to the ’Change, and there took up my wife and left him, and we two home, and I to walk in the garden with <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Howe, whom we took up, he having been to see us, he tells me how Creed has been questioned before the Council about a letter that has been met with, wherein he is mentioned by some fanatiques as a serviceable friend to them, but he says he acquitted himself well in it, but, however, something sticks against him, he says, with my Lord, at which I am not very sorry, for I believe he is a false fellow. I walked with him to Paul’s, he telling me how my Lord is little at home, minds his carding and little else, takes little notice of anybody; but that he do not think he is displeased, as I fear, with me, but is strange to all, which makes me the less troubled. So walked back home, and late at the office. So home and to bed. This day <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Turner did lend me, as a rarity, a manuscript of one <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wells, writ long ago, teaching the method of building a ship, which pleases me mightily. I was at it tonight, but durst not stay long at it, I being come to have a great pain and water in my eyes after candlelight.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1664-4-12" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1664-04-12">2nd</time>. Up and to my office, and afterwards sat, where great contest with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wood, and that doting fool Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes, that says whatever Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten says, though never minding whether to the King’s profit or not. At noon to the Coffeehouse, where excellent discourse with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Petty, who proposed it as a thing that is truly questionable, whether there really be any difference between waking and dreaming, that it is hard not only to tell how we know when we do a thing really or in a dream, but also to know what the difference [is] between one and the other. Thence to the ’Change, but having at this discourse long afterwards with Sir Thomas Chamberlin,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2119" id="noteref-2119" epub:type="noteref">2119</a> who tells me what I heard from others, that the complaints of most Companies were yesterday presented to the Committee of Parliament against the Dutch, excepting that of the East India, which he tells me was because they would not be said to be the first and only cause of a war with Holland, and that it is very probable, as well as most necessary, that we fall out with that people. I went to the ’Change, and there found most people gone, and so home to dinner, and thence to Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Warren’s, and with him past the whole afternoon, first looking over two ships<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2120" id="noteref-2120" epub:type="noteref">2120</a> of Captain Taylor’s and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Phin.</abbr> Pett’s now in building, and am resolved to learn something of the art, for I find it is not hard and very usefull, and thence to Woolwich, and after seeing <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Falconer, who is very ill, I to the yard, and there heard <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pett tell me several things of Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten’s ill managements, and so with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Warren walked to Greenwich, having good discourse, and thence by water, it being now moonshine and 9 or 10 o’clock at night, and landed at Wapping, and by him and his man safely brought to my door, and so he home, having spent the day with him very well. So home and eat something, and then to my office a while, and so home to prayers and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1664-4-13" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1664-04-13">3rd (Lord’s day)</time>. Being weary last night lay long, and called up by <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Joyce. So I rose, and his business was to ask advice of me, he being summonsed to the House of Lords tomorrow, for endeavouring to arrest my Lady Peters<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2121" id="noteref-2121" epub:type="noteref">2121</a> for a debt. I did give him advice, and will assist him. He stayed all the morning, but would not dine with me. So to my office and did business. At noon home to dinner, and being set with my wife in the kitchen my father comes and sat down there and dined with us. After dinner gives me an account of what he had done in his business of his house and goods, which is almost finished, and he the next week expects to be going down to Brampton again, which I am glad of because I fear the children of my Lord that are there for fear of any discontent. He being gone I to my office, and there very busy setting papers in order till late at night, only in the afternoon my wife sent for me home, to see her new laced gowne, that is her gown that is new laced; and indeed it becomes her very nobly, and is well made. I am much pleased with it. At night to supper, prayers, and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1664-4-14" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1664-04-14">4th</time>. Up, and walked to my Lord Sandwich’s; and there spoke with him about <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Joyce, who told me he would do what was fit in so tender a point. I can yet discern a coldness in him to admit me to any discourse with him. Thence to Westminster, to the Painted Chamber, and there met the two Joyces. Will in a very melancholy taking. After a little discourse I to the Lords’ House before they sat; and stood within it a good while, while the Duke of York came to me and spoke to me a good while about the new ship<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2122" id="noteref-2122" epub:type="noteref">2122</a> at Woolwich. Afterwards I spoke with my Lord Barkeley and my Lord Peterborough about it.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2123" id="noteref-2123" epub:type="noteref">2123</a> And so stayed without a good while, and saw my Lady Peters, an impudent jade, soliciting all the Lords on her behalf. And at last <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Joyce was called in; and by the consequences, and what my Lord Peterborough told me, I find that he did speak all he said to his disadvantage, and so was committed to the Black Rod: which is very hard, he doing what he did by the advice of my Lord Peters’ own steward. But the Sergeant of the Black Rod did direct one of his messengers to take him in custody, and so he was peaceably conducted to the Swan with two Necks, in Tuttle Street, to a handsome dining-room; and there was most civilly used, my uncle Fenner, and his brother Anthony, and some other friends being with him. But who would have thought that the fellow that I should have sworn could have spoken before all the world should in this be so daunted, as not to know what he said, and now to cry like a child. I protest, it is very strange to observe. I left them providing for his stay there tonight and getting a petition against tomorrow, and so away to Westminster Hall, and meeting <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry, he took me to his chamber, with Sir William Hickeman,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2124" id="noteref-2124" epub:type="noteref">2124</a> a member of their House, and a very civill gentleman. Here we dined very plentifully, and thence to Whitehall to the Duke’s, where we all met, and after some discourse of the condition of the Fleet, in order to a Dutch war, for that, I perceive, the Duke hath a mind it should come to, we away to the office, where we sat, and I took care to rise betimes, and so by water to Halfway House, talking all the way good discourse with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wayth, and there found my wife, who was gone with her maid Besse to have a walk. But, Lord! how my jealous mind did make me suspect that she might have some appointment to meet somebody. But I found the poor souls coming away thence, so I took them back, and eat and drank, and then home, and after at the office a while, I home to supper and to bed. It was a sad sight, me thought, today to see my Lord Peters coming out of the House fall out with his lady (from whom he is parted) about this business; saying that she disgraced him. But she hath been a handsome woman, and is, it seems, not only a lewd woman, but very high-spirited.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1664-4-15" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1664-04-15">5th</time>. Up very betimes, and walked to my cousin Anthony Joyce’s, and thence with him to his brother Will, in Tuttle Street, where I find him pretty cheery over [what] he was yesterday (like a coxcomb), his wife being come to him, and having had his boy with him last night. Here I stayed an hour or two and wrote over a fresh petition, that which was drawn by their solicitor not pleasing me, and thence to the Painted chamber, and by and by away by coach to my Lord Peterborough’s, and there delivered the petition into his hand, which he promised most readily to deliver to the House today. Thence back, and there spoke to several Lords, and so did his solicitor (one that <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Joyce hath promised £5 to if he be released). Lord Peterborough presented a petition to the House from <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Joyce: and a great dispute, we hear, there was in the House for and against it. At last it was carried that he should be bayled till the House meets again after Easter, he giving bond for his appearance. This was not so good as we hoped, but as good as we could well expect. Anon comes the King and passed the Bill for repealing the Triennial Act,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2125" id="noteref-2125" epub:type="noteref">2125</a> and another about Writs of Errour. I crowded in and heard the King’s speech to them; but he speaks the worst that ever I heard man in my life worse than if he read it all, and he had it in writing in his hand. Thence, after the House was up, and I inquired what the order of the House was, I to <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Joyce,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2126" id="noteref-2126" epub:type="noteref">2126</a> with his brother, and told them all. Here was Kate come, and is a comely fat woman. I would not stay dinner, thinking to go home to dinner, and did go by water as far as the bridge, but thinking that they would take it kindly my being there, to be bayled for him if there was need, I returned, but finding them gone out to look after it, only Will and his wife and sister left and some friends that came to visit him, I to Westminster Hall, and by and by by agreement to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lane’s lodging, whither I sent for a lobster, and with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Swayne and his wife eat it, and argued before them mightily for Hawly, but all would not do, although I made her angry by calling her old, and making her know what herself is. Her body was out of temper for any dalliance, and so after staying there 3 or 4 hours, but yet taking care to have my oath safe of not staying a quarter of an hour together with her, I went to <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Joyce, where I find the order come, and bayle (his father and brother) given; and he paying his fees, which come to above £2, besides £5 he is to give one man, and his charges of eating and drinking here, and 10<abbr>s.</abbr> a-day as many days as he stands under bayle: which, I hope, will teach him hereafter to hold his tongue better than he used to do. Thence with <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">Anth.</abbr> Joyce’s wife alone home talking of Will’s folly, and having set her down, home myself, where I find my wife dressed as if she had been abroad, but I think she was not, but she answering me some way that I did not like I pulled her by the nose, indeed to offend her, though afterwards to appease her I denied it, but only it was done in haste. The poor wretch took it mighty ill, and I believe besides wringing her nose she did feel pain, and so cried a great while, but by and by I made her friends, and so after supper to my office a while, and then home to bed. This day great numbers of merchants came to a Grand Committee of the House to bring in their claims against the Dutch. I pray God guide the issue to our good!</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1664-4-16" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1664-04-16">6th</time>. Up and to my office, whither by and by came John Noble, my father’s old servant, to speake with me. I smelling the business, took him home; and there, all alone, he told me how he had been serviceable to my brother Tom, in the business of his getting his servant, an ugly jade, Margaret, with child. She was brought to bed in <abbr>St.</abbr> Sepulchre’s parish of two children; one is dead, the other is alive; her name Elizabeth, and goes by the name of Taylor, daughter to John Taylor. It seems Tom did a great while trust one Crawly with the business, who daily got money of him; and at last, finding himself abused, he broke the matter to <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Noble, upon a vowe of secrecy. Tom’s first plott was to go on the other side the water and give a beggar woman something to take the child. They did once go, but did nothing, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Noble saying that seven years hence the mother might come to demand the child and force him to produce it, or to be suspected of murder. Then I think it was that they consulted, and got one Cave, a poor pensioner in <abbr>St.</abbr> Bride’s parish to take it, giving him £5, he thereby promising to keepe it forever without more charge to them. The parish hereupon indite the man Cave for bringing this child upon the parish, and by Sir Richard Browne he is sent to the Counter. Cave thence writes to Tom to get him out. Tom answers him in a letter of his owne hand, which <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Noble showed me, but not signed by him, wherein he speaks of freeing him and getting security for him, but nothing as to the business of the child, or anything like it: so that forasmuch as I could guess, there is nothing therein to my brother’s prejudice as to the main point, and therefore I did not labour to tear or take away the paper. Cave being released, demands £5 more to secure my brother forever against the child; and he was forced to give it him and took bond of Cave in £100, made at a scrivener’s, one Hudson, I think, in the Old Bayly, to secure John Taylor, and his assigns, <abbr>etc.</abbr> (in consideration of £10 paid him), from all trouble, or charge of meat, drink, clothes, and breeding of Elizabeth Taylor; and it seems, in the doing of it, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Noble was looked upon as the assignee of this John Taylor. Noble says that he furnished Tom with this money, and is also bound by another bond to pay him 20<abbr>s.</abbr> more this next Easter Monday; but nothing for either sum appears under Tom’s hand. I told him how I am like to lose a great sum by his death, and would not pay any more myself, but I would speake to my father about it against the afternoon. So away he went, and I all the morning in my office busy, and at noon home to dinner mightily oppressed with wind, and after dinner took coach and to Paternoster Row, and there bought a pretty silke for a petticoate for my wife, and thence set her down at the New Exchange, and I leaving the coat at Unthanke’s, went to Whitehall, but the Council meeting at Worcester House I went thither, and there delivered to the Duke of Albemarle a paper touching some Tangier business, and thence to the ’Change for my wife, and walked to my father’s, who was packing up some things for the country. I took him up and told him this business of Tom, at which the poor wretch was much troubled, and desired me that I would speak with <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Noble, and do what I could and thought fit in it without concerning him in it. So I went to Noble, and saw the bond that Cave did give and also Tom’s letter that I mentioned above, and upon the whole I think some shame may come, but that it will be hard from anything I see there to prove the child to be his. Thence to my father and told what I had done, and how I had quieted Noble by telling him that, though we are resolved to part with no more money out of our own purses, yet if he can make it appear a true debt that it may be justifiable for us to pay it, we will do our part to get it paid, and said that I would have it paid before my own debt. So my father and I both a little satisfied, though vexed to think what a rogue my brother was in all respects. I took my wife by coach home, and to my office, where late with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Warren, and so home to supper and to bed. I heard today that the Dutch have begun with us by granting letters of marque against us; but I believe it not.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1664-4-17" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1664-04-17">7th</time>. Up and to my office, where busy, and by and by comes Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Warren and old <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bond in order to the resolving me some questions about masts and their proportions, but he could say little to me to my satisfaction, and so I held him not long but parted. So to my office busy till noon and then to the ’Change, where high talk of the Dutch’s protest against our Royal Company in Guinny,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2127" id="noteref-2127" epub:type="noteref">2127</a> and their granting letters of marque against us there, and everybody expects a war, but I hope it will not yet be so, nor that this is true. Thence to dinner, where my wife got me a pleasant French fricassee of veal for dinner, and thence to the office, where vexed to see how Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten ordered things this afternoon (vide my office book, for about this time I have begun, my notions and informations encreasing now greatly every day, to enter all occurrences extraordinary in my office in a book by themselves), and so in the evening after long discourse and eased my mind by discourse with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Warren, I to my business late, and so home to supper and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1664-4-18" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1664-04-18">8th</time>. Up betimes and to the office, and anon, it begunn to be fair after a great shower this morning, Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten and I by water (calling his son Castle by the way, between whom and I no notice at all of his letter the other day to me) to Deptford, and after a turn in the yard, I went with him to the Almes’-house to see the new building which he, with some ambition, is building of there, during his being Master of Trinity House; and a good worke it is, but to see how simply he answered somebody concerning setting up the arms of the corporation upon the door, that and anything else he did not deny it, but said he would leave that to the master that comes after him. There I left him and to the King’s yard again, and there made good inquiry into the business of the poop lanterns, wherein I found occasion to correct myself mightily for what I have done in the contract with the platerer, and am resolved, though I know not how, to make them to alter it, though they signed it last night, and so I took Stanes<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2128" id="noteref-2128" epub:type="noteref">2128</a> home with me by boat and discoursed it, and he will come to reason when I can make him to understand it. No sooner landed but it fell a mighty storm of rain and hail, so I put into a cane shop and bought one to walk with, cost me 4<abbr>s.</abbr> 6<abbr>d.</abbr>, all of one joint. So home to dinner, and had an excellent Good Friday dinner of pease porridge and apple pye. So to the office all the afternoon preparing a new book for my contracts, and this afternoon come home the office globes done to my great content. In the evening a little to visit Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn, who hath a feeling this day or two of his old pain. Then to walk in the garden with my wife, and so to my office a while, and then home to the only Lenten supper I have had of wiggs<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2129" id="noteref-2129" epub:type="noteref">2129</a> and ale, and so to bed. This morning betimes came to my office to me boatswain Smith of Woolwich, telling me a notable piece of knavery of the officers of the yard and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gold in behalf of a contract made for some old ropes by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wood, and I believe I shall find Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten of the plot (vide my office daybook).<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2130" id="noteref-2130" epub:type="noteref">2130</a></p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1664-4-19" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1664-04-19">9th</time>. The last night, whether it was from cold I got today upon the water I know not, or whether it was from my mind being over concerned with Stanes’s business of the platery of the navy, for my minds was mighty troubled with the business all night long, I did wake about one o’clock in the morning, a thing I most rarely do, and pissed a little with great pain, continued sleepy, but in a high fever all night, fiery hot, and in some pain. Towards morning I slept a little and waking found myself better, but⁠ ⁠… with some pain, and rose I confess with my clothes sweating, and it was somewhat cold too, which I believe might do me more hurt, for I continued cold and apt to shake all the morning, but that some trouble with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes and Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten kept me warm. At noon home to dinner upon tripes, and so though not well abroad with my wife by coach to her Tailor’s and the New Exchange, and thence to my father’s and spoke one word with him, and thence home, where I found myself sick in my stomach and vomited, which I do not use to do. Then I drank a glass or two of Hypocras, and to the office to dispatch some business, necessary, and so home and to bed, and by the help of Mithrydate<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2131" id="noteref-2131" epub:type="noteref">2131</a> slept very well.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1664-4-20" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1664-04-20">10th (Lord’s day)</time>. Lay long in bed, and then up and my wife dressed herself, it being Easter day, but I not being so well as to go out, she, though much against her will, stayed at home with me; for she had put on her new best gowns, which indeed is very fine now with the lace; and this morning her taylor brought home her other new laced silks gowns with a smaller lace, and new petticoats, I bought the other day both very pretty. We spent the day in pleasant talks and company one with another, reading in <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Fuller’s book<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2132" id="noteref-2132" epub:type="noteref">2132</a> what he says of the family of the Cliffords and Kingsmills, and at night being myself better than I was by taking a glyster, which did carry away a great deal of wind, I after supper at night went to bed and slept well.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1664-4-21" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1664-04-21">11th</time>. Lay long talking with my wife, then up and to my chamber preparing papers against my father comes to lie here for discourse about country business. Dined well with my wife at home, being myself not yet thorough well, making water with some pain, but better than I was, and all my fear of an ague gone away. In the afternoon my father came to see us, and he gone I up to my morning’s work again, and so in the evening a little to the office and to see Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten, who is ill again, and so home to supper and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1664-4-22" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1664-04-22">12th</time>. Up, and after my wife had dressed herself very fine in her new laced gown, and very handsome indeed, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Howe also coming to see us, I carried her by coach to my uncle Wight’s and set her down there, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Howe and I to the Coffeehouse, where we sat talking about getting of him some place under my Lord of advantage if he should go to sea, and I would be glad to get him secretary and to out Creed if I can, for he is a crafty and false rogue. Thence a little to the ’Change, and thence took him to my uncle Wight’s, where dined my father, poor melancholy man, that used to be as full of life as anybody, and also my aunt’s brother, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sutton, a merchant in Flanders, a very sober, fine man, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cole and his lady; but, Lord! how I used to adore that man’s talk, and now methinks he is but an ordinary man, his son a pretty boy indeed, but his nose unhappily awry. Other good company and an indifferent, and but indifferent dinner for so much company, and after dinner got a coach, very dear, it being Easter time and very foul weather, to my Lord’s, and there visited my Lady, and leaving my wife there I and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Howe to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pagett’s, and there heard some musique not very good, but only one <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Walgrave, an Englishman bred at Rome, who plays the best upon the lute that I ever heard man. Here I also met <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hill<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2133" id="noteref-2133" epub:type="noteref">2133</a> the little merchant, and after all was done we sung. I did well enough a Psalm or two of Lawes; he I perceive has good skill and sings well, and a friend of his sings a good base. Thence late walked with them two as far as my Lord’s, thinking to take up my wife and carry them home, but there being no coach to be got away they went, and I stayed a great while, it being very late, about 10 o’clock, before a coach could be got. I found my Lord and ladies and my wife at supper. My Lord seems very kind. But I am apt to think still the worst, and that it is only in show, my wife and Lady being there. So home, and find my father come to lie at our house; and so supped, and saw him, poor man, to bed, my heart never being fuller of love to him, nor admiration of his prudence and pains heretofore in the world than now, to see how Tom hath carried himself in his trade; and how the poor man hath his thoughts going to provide for his younger children and my mother. But I hope they shall never want. So myself and wife to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1664-4-23" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1664-04-23">13th</time>. Though late, past 12, before we went to bed, yet I heard my poor father up, and so I rang up my people, and I rose and got something to eat and drink for him, and so abroad, it being a mighty foul day, by coach, setting my father down in Fleet Street and I to <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s, where I found <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry (the Duke being now come thither for the summer) with a goldsmith, sorting out his old plate to change for new; but, Lord! what a deal he hath! I stayed and had two or three hours discourse with him, talking about the disorders of our office, and I largely to tell him how things are carried by Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten and Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes to my great grief. He seems much concerned also, and for all the King’s matters that are done after the same rate everywhere else, and even the Duke’s household matters too, generally with corruption, but most indeed with neglect and indifferency. I spoke very loud and clear to him my thoughts of Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">J.</abbr> Minnes and the other, and trust him with the using of them. Then to talk of our business with the Dutch; he tells me fully that he believes it will not come to a war; for first, he showed me a letter from Sir George Downing, his own hand, where he assures him that the Dutch themselves do not desire, but above all things fear it, and that they neither have given letters of marque against our shipps in Guinny, nor do De Ruyter<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2134" id="noteref-2134" epub:type="noteref">2134</a> stay at home with his fleet with an eye to any such thing, but for want of a wind, and is now come out and is going to the Streights. He tells me also that the most he expects is that upon the merchants’ complaints, the Parliament will represent them to the King, desiring his securing of his subjects against them, and though perhaps they may not directly see fit, yet even this will be enough to let the Dutch know that the Parliament do not oppose the King, and by that means take away their hopes, which was that the King of England could not get money or do anything towards a war with them, and so thought themselves free from making any restitution, which by this they will be deceived in. He tells me also that the Dutch states are in no good condition themselves, differing one with another, and that for certain none but the states of Holland and Zealand will contribute towards a war, the others reckoning themselves, being inland, not concerned in the profits of war or peace. But it is pretty to see what he says, that those here that are forward for a war at Court, they are reported in the world to be only designers of getting money into the King’s hands, they that elsewhere are for it have a design to trouble the kingdom and to give the Fanatiques an opportunity of doing hurt, and lastly those that are against it (as he himself for one is very cold therein) are said to be bribed by the Dutch. After all this discourse he carried me in his coach, it raining still, to Charing Cross, and there put me into another, and I calling my father and brother carried them to my house to dinner, my wife keeping bed all day.⁠ ⁠… All the afternoon at the office with <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Boddam<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2135" id="noteref-2135" epub:type="noteref">2135</a> looking over his particulars about the Chest of Chatham, which shows enough what a knave Commissioner Pett hath been all along, and how Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten hath gone on in getting good allowance to himself and others out of the poors’ money. Time will show all. So in the evening to see Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn, and then home to my father to keep him company, he being to go out of town, and up late with him and my brother John till past 12 at night to make up papers of Tom’s accounts fit to leave with my cousin Scott. At last we did make an end of them, and so after supper all to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1664-4-24" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1664-04-24">14th</time>. Up betimes, and after my father’s eating something, I walked out with him as far as Milk Street, he turning down to Cripplegate to take coach; and at the end of the street I took leave, being much afeard I shall not see him here any more, he do decay so much every day, and so I walked on, there being never a coach to be had till I came to Charing Cross, and there <abbr>Col.</abbr> Froud took me up and carried me to <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s, where with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry and Povy, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, about my Lord Peterborough’s accounts, but, Lord! to see still what a puppy that Povy is with all his show is very strange. Thence to Whitehall and <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> C[oventry] and I and Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Rider resolved upon a day to meet and make an end of all the business. Thence walked with Creed to the Coffeehouse in Covent Garden, where no company, but he told me many fine experiments at Gresham College,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2136" id="noteref-2136" epub:type="noteref">2136</a> and some demonstration that the heat and cold of the weather do rarify and condense the very body of glasse, as in a bolt head<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2137" id="noteref-2137" epub:type="noteref">2137</a> with cold water in it put into hot water, shall first by rarifying the glasse make the water sink, and then when the heat comes to the water makes that rise again, and then put into cold water makes the water by condensing the glass to rise, and then when the cold comes to the water makes it sink, which is very pretty and true, he saw it tried. Thence by coach home, and dined above with my wife by her bedside, she keeping her bed.⁠ ⁠… So to the office, where a great conflict with Wood and Castle about their New England masts.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2138" id="noteref-2138" epub:type="noteref">2138</a> So in the evening my mind a little vexed, but yet without reason, for I shall prevail, I hope, for the King’s profit, and so home to supper and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1664-4-25" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1664-04-25">15th</time>. Up and all the morning with Captain Taylor at my house talking about things of the Navy, and among other things I showed him my letters to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry, wherein he acknowledges that nobody to this day did ever understand so much as I have done, and I believe him, for I perceive he did very much listen to every article as things new to him, and is contented to abide by my opinion therein in his great contest with us about his and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wood’s masts. At noon to the ’Change, where I met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hill, the little merchant, with whom, I perceive, I shall contract a musical acquaintance; but I will make it as little troublesome as I can. Home and dined, and then with my wife by coach to the Duke’s house, and there saw <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The German Princess</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2139" id="noteref-2139" epub:type="noteref">2139</a> acted, by the woman herself; but never was anything so well done in earnest, worse performed in jest upon the stage; and indeed the whole play, abating the drollery of him that acts her husband, is very simple, unless here and there a witty sprinkle or two. We met and sat by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Clerke. Thence homewards, calling at Madam Turner’s, and thence set my wife down at my aunt Wight’s and I to my office till late, and then at 10 at night fetched her home, and so again to my office a little, and then to supper and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1664-4-26" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1664-04-26">16th</time>. Up and to the office, where all the morning upon the dispute of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wood’s masts, and at noon with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry to the African House; and after a good and pleasant dinner, up with him, Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Rider, the simple Povy, of all the most ridiculous foole that ever I knew to attend to business, and Creed and Vernatty, about my Lord Peterborough’s accounts; but the more we look into them, the more we see of them that makes dispute, which made us break off, and so I home, and there found my wife and Besse gone over the water to Halfway house, and after them, thinking to have gone to Woolwich, but it was too late, so eat a cake and home, and thence by coach to have spoke with Tom Trice about a letter I met with this afternoon from my cousin Scott, wherein he seems to deny proceeding as my father’s attorney in administering for him in my brother Tom’s estate, but I find him gone out of town, and so returned vexed home and to the office, where late writing a letter to him, and so home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1664-4-27" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1664-04-27">17th (Lord’s day)</time>. Up, and I put on my best cloth black suit and my velvet cloake, and with my wife in her best laced suit to church, where we have not been these nine or ten weeks. The truth is, my jealousy hath hindered it, for fear she should see Pembleton. He was here today, but I think sat so as he could not see her, which did please me, God help me! mightily, though I know well enough that in reason this is nothing but my ridiculous folly. Home to dinner, and in the afternoon, after long consulting whether to go to Woolwich or no to see <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Falconer, but indeed to prevent my wife going to church, I did however go to church with her, where a young simple fellow did preach: I slept soundly all the sermon, and thence to Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn’s, my wife and I, there she talking with him and his daughter, and thence with my wife walked to my uncle Wight’s and there supped, where very merry, but I vexed to see what charges the vanity of my aunt puts her husband to among her friends and nothing at all among ours. Home and to bed. Our parson, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mills, his owne mistake in reading of the service was very remarkable, that instead of saying, “We beseech thee to preserve to our use the kindly fruits of the earth,” he cries, “Preserve to our use our gracious Queen Katherine.”</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1664-4-28" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1664-04-28">18th</time>. Up and by coach to Westminster, and there solicited <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Joyce’s business again; and did speake to the Duke of York about it, who did understand it very well. I afterwards did without the House fall in company with my Lady Peters, and endeavoured to mollify her; but she told me she would not, to redeem her from hell, do anything to release him; but would be revenged while she lived, if she lived the age of Methusalem. I made many friends, and so did others. At last it was ordered by the Lords that it should be referred to the Committee of Privileges to consider. So I, after discoursing with the Joyces, away by coach to the ’Change; and there, among other things, do hear that a Jew hath put in a policy of four percent to any man, to insure him against a Dutch war for four months; I could find in my heart to take him at this offer, but however will advise first, and to that end took coach to <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s, but <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry was gone forth, and I thence to Westminster Hall, where <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lane was gone forth, and so I missed of my intent to be with her this afternoon, and therefore meeting <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blagrave, went home with him, and there he and his kinswoman sang, but I was not pleased with it, they singing methought very ill, or else I am grown worse to please than heretofore. Thence to the Hall again, and after meeting with several persons, and talking there, I to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hunt’s (where I knew my wife and my aunt Wight were about business), and they being gone to walk in the park I went after them with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hunt, who stayed at home for me, and finding them did by coach, which I had agreed to wait for me, go with them all and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hunt and a kinswoman of theirs, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Steward, to Hide Park, where I have not been since last year; where I saw the King with his periwigg, but not altered at all; and my Lady Castlemayne in a coach by herself, in yellow satin and a pinner on; and many brave persons. And myself being in a hackney and full of people, was ashamed to be seen by the world, many of them knowing me. Thence in the evening home, setting my aunt at home, and thence we sent for a joint of meat to supper, and thence to the office at 11 o’clock at night, and so home to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1664-4-29" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1664-04-29">19th</time>. Up and to <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s, where long with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry, Povy, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, in their Tangier accounts, but such the folly of that coxcomb Povy that we could do little in it, and so parted for the time, and I to walk with Creed and Vernaty in the Physique Garden in <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s Park; where I first saw orange-trees,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2140" id="noteref-2140" epub:type="noteref">2140</a> and other fine trees. So to Westminster Hall, and thence by water to the Temple, and so walked to the ’Change, and there find the ’Change full of news from Guinny, some say the Dutch have sunk our ships and taken our fort, and others say we have done the same to them. But I find by our merchants that something is done, but is yet a secret among them. So home to dinner, and then to the office, and at night with Captain Tayler consulting how to get a little money by letting him the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Elias</i><a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2141" id="noteref-2141" epub:type="noteref">2141</a> to fetch masts from New England. So home to supper and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1664-4-30" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1664-04-30">20th</time>. Up and by coach to Westminster, and there solicited <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Joyce’s business all the morning, and meeting in the Hall with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry, he told me how the Committee for Trade<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2142" id="noteref-2142" epub:type="noteref">2142</a> have received now all the complaints of the merchants against the Dutch, and were resolved to report very highly the wrongs they have done us (when, God knows! it is only our owne negligence and laziness that hath done us the wrong) and this to be made to the House tomorrow. I went also out of the Hall with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Lane to the Swan at <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert’s in the Palace Yard to try a couple of bands, and did (though I had a mind to be playing the fool with her) purposely stay but a little while, and kept the door open, and called the master and mistress of the house one after another to drink and talk with me, and showed them both my old and new bands. So that as I did nothing so they are able to bear witness that I had no opportunity there to do anything. Thence by coach with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn home, calling at the Temple for Lawes’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Psalms</i>, which I did not so much (by being against my oath) buy as only lay down money till others be bound better for me, and by that time I hope to get money of the Treasurer of the Navy by bills, which, according to my oath, shall make me able to do it. At home dined, and all the afternoon at a Committee of the Chest, and at night comes my aunt and uncle Wight and Nan Ferrers and supped merrily with me, my uncle coming in an hour after them almost foxed. Great pleasure by discourse with them, and so, they gone, late to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1664-5-1" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1664-05-01">21st</time>. Up pretty betimes and to my office, and thither came by and by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vernaty and stayed two hours with me, but <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gauden did not come, and so he went away to meet again anon. Then comes <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed, and, after some discourse, he and I and my wife by coach to Westminster (leaving her at Unthanke’s, her tailor’s) Hall, and there at the Lords’ House heard that it is ordered, that, upon submission upon the knee both to the House and my Lady Peters, <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Joyce shall be released. I forthwith made him submit, and aske pardon upon his knees; which he did before several Lords. But my Lady would not hear it; but swore she would post the Lords, that the world might know what pitifull Lords the King hath; and that revenge was sweeter to her than milk; and that she would never be satisfied unless he stood in a pillory, and demand pardon there. But I perceive the Lords are ashamed of her, and so I away calling with my wife at a place or two to inquire after a couple of maids recommended to us, but we found both of them bad. So set my wife at my uncle Wight’s and I home, and presently to the ’Change, where I did some business, and thence to my uncle’s and there dined very well, and so to the office, we sat all the afternoon, but no sooner sat but news comes my Lady Sandwich was come to see us, so I went out, and running up (her friend however before me) I perceive by my dear Lady blushing that in my dining-room she was doing something upon the pott, which I also was ashamed of, and so fell to some discourse, but without pleasure through very pity to my Lady. She tells me, and I find true since, that the House this day have voted that the King be desired to demand right for the wrong done us by the Dutch,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2143" id="noteref-2143" epub:type="noteref">2143</a> and that they will stand by him with their lives and fortunes: which is a very high vote, and more than I expected. What the issue will be, God knows! My Lady, my wife not being at home, did not stay, but, poor, good woman, went away, I being mightily taken with her dear visit, and so to the office, where all the afternoon till late, and so to my office, and then to supper and to bed, thinking to rise betimes tomorrow.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1664-5-2" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1664-05-02">22nd</time>. Having directed it last night, I was called up this morning before four o’clock. It was full light enough to dress myself, and so by water against tide, it being a little coole, to Greenwich; and thence, only that it was somewhat foggy till the sun got to some height, walked with great pleasure to Woolwich, in my way staying several times to listen to the nightingales. I did much business both at the Ropeyarde and the other, and on floate I discovered a plain cheat which in time I shall publish of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ackworth’s. Thence, having visited <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Falconer<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2144" id="noteref-2144" epub:type="noteref">2144</a> also, who lies still sick, but hopes to be better, I walked to Greenwich, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Deane with me. Much good discourse, and I think him a very just man, only a little conceited, but yet very able in his way, and so he by water also with me also to towne. I home, and immediately dressing myself, by coach with my wife to my Lord Sandwich’s, but they having dined we would not ’light but went to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Turner’s, and there got something to eat, and thence after reading part of a good play, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">The.</abbr>, my wife and I, in their coach to Hide Park, where great plenty of gallants, and pleasant it was, only for the dust. Here I saw <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bendy, my Lady Spillman’s faire daughter that was, who continues yet very handsome. Many others I saw with great content, and so back again to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Turner’s, and then took a coach and home. I did also carry them into <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s Park and showed them the garden. To my office awhile while supper was making ready, and so home to supper and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1664-5-3" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1664-05-03">23rd (Coronation day)</time>. Up, and after doing something at my office, and, it being a holiday, no sitting likely to be, I down by water to Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Warren’s, who hath been ill, and there talked long with him good discourse, especially about Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Batten’s knavery and his son Castle’s ill language of me behind my back, saying that I favour my fellow traytours, but I shall be even with him. So home and to the ’Change, where I met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry, who himself is now full of talk of a Dutch war; for it seems the Lords have concurred in the Commons’ vote about it; and so the next week it will be presented to the King, insomuch that he do desire we would look about to see what stores we lack, and buy what we can. Home to dinner, where I and my wife much troubled about my money that is in my Lord Sandwich’s hand, for fear of his going to sea and be killed; but I will get what of it out I can. All the afternoon, not being well, at my office, and there doing much business, my thoughts still running upon a war and my money. At night home to supper and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1664-5-4" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1664-05-04">24th (Lord’s day)</time>. Up, and all the morning in my chamber setting some of my private papers in order, for I perceive that now publique business takes up so much of my time that I must get time a-Sundays or a-nights to look after my owne matters. Dined and spent all the afternoon talking with my wife, at night a little to the office, and so home to supper and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1664-5-5" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1664-05-05">25th</time>. Up, and with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Penn by coach to <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s and there up to the Duke, and after he was ready to his closet, where most of our talk about a Dutch war, and discoursing of things indeed now for it. The Duke, which gives me great good hopes, do talk of setting up a good discipline in the fleet. In the Duke’s chamber there is a bird, given him by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierce, the surgeon, comes from the East Indys, black the greatest part, with the finest collar of white about the neck;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2145" id="noteref-2145" epub:type="noteref">2145</a> but talks many things and neyes like the horse, and other things, the best almost that ever I heard bird in my life. Thence down with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry and Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Rider, who was there (going along with us from the East Indya house today) to discourse of my Lord Peterborough’s accounts, and then walked over the Park, and in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cutler’s coach with him and Rider as far as the Strand, and thence I walked to my Lord Sandwich’s, where by agreement I met my wife, and there dined with the young ladies; my Lady, being not well, kept her chamber. Much simple discourse at table among the young ladies. After dinner walked in the garden, talking with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore about my Lord’s business. He told me my Lord runs in debt every day more and more, and takes little care how to come out of it. He counted to me how my Lord pays use now for above £9,000, which is a sad thing, especially considering the probability of his going to sea, in great danger of his life, and his children, many of them, to provide for. Thence, the young ladies going out to visit, I took my wife by coach out through the city, discoursing how to spend the afternoon; and conquered, with much ado, a desire of going to a play; but took her out at White Chapel, and to Bednal Green; so to Hackney, where I have not been many a year, since a little child I boarded there. Thence to Kingsland, by my nurse’s house, Goody Lawrence, where my brother Tom and I was kept when young. Then to Newington Green, and saw the outside of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Herbert’s house, where she lived, and my Aunt Ellen with her; but, Lord! how in every point I find myself to overvalue things when a child. Thence to Islington, and so to <abbr>St.</abbr> John’s to the Red Bull,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2146" id="noteref-2146" epub:type="noteref">2146</a> and there saw the latter part of a rude prize fought, but with good pleasure enough; and thence back to Islington, and at the King’s Head, where Pitts lived, we ’light and eat and drunk for remembrance of the old house sake, and so through Kingsland again, and so to Bishopsgate, and so home with great pleasure. The country mighty pleasant, and we with great content home, and after supper to bed, only a little troubled at the young ladies leaving my wife so today, and from some passages fearing my Lady might be offended. But I hope the best.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1664-5-6" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1664-05-06">26th</time>. Up, and to my Lord Sandwich’s, and coming a little too early, I went and saw <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Joyce, and by and by comes in Anthony, they both owning a great deal of kindness received from me in their late business, and indeed I did what I could, and yet less I could not do. It has cost the poor man above £40; besides, he is likely to lose his debt. Thence to my Lord’s, and by and by he comes down, and with him (Creed with us) I rode in his coach to <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s, talking about <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Joyce’s business mighty merry, and my Lady Peters, he says, is a drunken jade, he himself having seen her drunk in the lobby of their House. I went up with him to the Duke, where methought the Duke did not show him any so great fondness as he was wont; and methought my Lord was not pleased that I should see the Duke made no more of him, not that I know anything of any unkindnesse, but I think verily he is not as he was with him in his esteem. By and by the Duke went out and we with him through the Park, and there I left him going into Whitehall, and Creed and I walked round the Park, a pleasant walk, observing the birds, which is very pleasant; and so walked to the New Exchange, and there had a most delicate dish of curds and creame, and discourse with the good woman of the house, a discreet well-bred woman, and a place with great delight I shall make it now and then to go thither. Thence up, and after a turn or two in the ’Change, home to the Old Exchange by coach, where great news and true, I saw by written letters, of strange fires seen at Amsterdam in the ayre, and not only there, but in other places thereabout. The talk of a Dutch war is not so hot, but yet I fear it will come to it at last. So home and to the office, where we sat late. My wife gone this afternoon to the buriall of my she-cousin Scott,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2147" id="noteref-2147" epub:type="noteref">2147</a> a good woman; and it is a sad consideration how the Pepys’s decay, and nobody almost that I know in a present way of encreasing them. At night late at my office, and so home to my wife to supper and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1664-5-7" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1664-05-07">27th</time>. Up, and all the morning very busy with multitude of clients, till my head began to be overloaded. Towards noon I took coach and to the Parliament house door, and there stayed the rising of the House, and with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">G.</abbr> Carteret and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry discoursed of some tar that I have been endeavouring to buy, for the market begins apace to rise upon us, and I would be glad first to serve the King well, and next if I could I find myself now begin to cast how to get a penny myself. Home by coach with Alderman Backewell in his coach, whose opinion is that the Dutch will not give over the business without putting us to some trouble to set out a fleet; and then, if they see we go on well, will seek to salve up the matter. Upon the ’Change busy. Thence home to dinner, and thence to the office till my head was ready to burst with business, and so with my wife by coach, I sent her to my Lady Sandwich and myself to my cousin Roger Pepys’s chamber, and there he did advise me about our Exchequer business, and also about my brother John, he is put by my father upon interceding for him, but I will not yet seem the least to pardon him nor can I in my heart. However, he and I did talk how to get him a mandamus for a fellowship, which I will endeavour. Thence to my Lady’s, and in my way met <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sanchy, of Cambridge, whom I have not met a great while. He seems a simple fellow, and tells me their master, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Rainbow,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2148" id="noteref-2148" epub:type="noteref">2148</a> is newly made Bishop of Carlisle. To my Lady’s, and she not being well did not see her, but straight home with my wife, and late to my office, concluding in the business of Wood’s masts, which I have now done and I believe taken more pains in it than ever any Principall officer in this world ever did in anything to no profit to this day. So, weary, sleepy, and hungry, home and to bed. This day the Houses attended the King, and delivered their votes to him upon the business of the Dutch; and he thanks them, and promises an answer in writing.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1664-5-8" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1664-05-08">28th</time>. Up and close at my office all the morning. To the ’Change busy at noon, and so home to dinner, and then in the afternoon at the office till night, and so late home quite tired with business, and without joy in myself otherwise than that I am by God’s grace enabled to go through it and one day, hope to have benefit by it. So home to supper and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1664-5-9" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1664-05-09">29th</time>. Up betimes, and with Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Rider and Cutler to Whitehall. Rider and I to <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s, and there with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry did proceed strictly upon some fooleries of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Povy’s in my Lord Peterborough’s accounts, which will touch him home, and I am glad of it, for he is the most troublesome impertinent man that ever I met with. Thence to the ’Change, and there, after some business, home to dinner, where Luellin and Mount came to me and dined, and after dinner my wife and I by coach to see my Lady Sandwich, where we find all the children and my Lord removed, and the house so melancholy that I thought my Lady had been dead, knowing that she was not well; but it seems she hath the meazles, and I fear the small pox, poor lady. It grieves me mightily; for it will be a sad houre to the family should she miscarry. Thence straight home and to the office, and in the evening comes <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hill the merchant and another with him that sings well, and we sung some things, and good musique it seemed to me, only my mind too full of business to have much pleasure in it. But I will have more of it. They gone, and I having paid <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moxon<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2149" id="noteref-2149" epub:type="noteref">2149</a> for the work he has done for the office upon the King’s globes, I to my office, where very late busy upon Captain Tayler’s bills for his masts, which I think will never off my hand. Home to supper and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article id="entry-1664-5-10" epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1664-05-10">30th</time>. Up and all the morning at the office. At noon to the ’Change, where, after business done, Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Rider and Cutler took me to the Old James and there did give me a good dish of mackerell, the first I have seen this year, very good, and good discourse. After dinner we fell to business about their contract for tar, in which and in another business of Sir <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Rider’s, canvas, wherein I got him to contract with me, I held them to some terms against their wills, to the King’s advantage, which I believe they will take notice of to my credit. Thence home, and by water by a gally down to Woolwich, and there a good while with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pett upon the new ship discoursing and learning of him. Thence with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Deane to see <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Falconer, and there find him in a way to be well. So to the water (after much discourse with great content with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Deane) and home late, and so to the office, wrote to my father among other things my continued displeasure against my brother John, so that I will give him nothing more out of my own purse, which will trouble the poor man, but however it is fit that I should take notice of my brother’s ill carriage to me. Then home and till 12 at night about my month’s accounts, wherein I have just kept within compass, this having been a spending month. So my people being all abed I put myself to bed very sleepy. All the news now is what will become of the Dutch business, whether war or peace. We all seem to desire it, as thinking ourselves to have advantages at present over them; for my part I dread it. The Parliament promises to assist the King with lives and fortunes, and he receives it with thanks and promises to demand satisfaction of the Dutch. My poor Lady Sandwich is fallen sick three days since of the meazles. My Lord Digby’s business is hushed up, and nothing made of it; he is gone, and the discourse quite ended. Never more quiet in my family all the days of my life than now, there being only my wife and I and Besse and the little girl Susan, the best wenches to our content that we can ever expect.</p>
			</article>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
