<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>May 1661</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="chapter-17" epub:type="chapter z3998:diary">
			<h2 epub:type="title">May 1661</h2>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-5-1">May 1st</time>. Up early, and bated at Petersfield, in the room which the King lay in lately at his being there. Here very merry, and played us and our wives at bowls. Then we set forth again, and so to Portsmouth, seeming to me to be a very pleasant and strong place; and we lay at the Red Lyon, where Haselrigge and Scott and Walton did hold their councill, when they were here, against Lambert and the Committee of Safety. Several officers of the Yard came to see us tonight, and merry we were, but troubled to have no better lodgings.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-5-2">2nd</time>. Up, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed and I to walk round the town upon the walls. Then to our inn, and there all the officers of the Yard to see me with great respect, and I walked with them to the Dock and saw all the stores, and much pleased with the sight of the place. Back and brought them all to dinner with me, and treated them handsomely; and so after dinner by water to the Yard, and there we made the sale of the old provisions. Then we and our wives all to see the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Montagu</i>, which is a fine ship, and so to the town again by water, and then to see the room where the Duke of Buckingham was killed by Felton.⁠—1628. So to our lodging, and to supper and to bed. Tonight came <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Stevens to town to help us to pay off the Fox.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-5-3">3rd</time>. Early to walk with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed up and down the town, and it was in his and some others’ thoughts to have got me made free of the town, but the Mayor, it seems, unwilling, and so they could not do it. Then to the payhouse, and there paid off the ship, and so to a short dinner, and then took coach, leaving <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hater there to stay with her husband’s friends, and we to Petersfield, having nothing more of trouble in all my journey, but the exceeding unmannerly and most epicure-like palate of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed. Here my wife and I lay in the room the Queen lately lay at her going into France.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-5-4">4th</time>. Up in the morning and took coach, and so to Gilford, where we lay at the Red Lyon, the best Inn, and lay in the room the King lately lay in, where we had time to see the Hospital, built by Archbishop Abbott, and the free school, and were civilly treated by the Mayster. So to supper, and to bed, being very merry about our discourse with the Drawers concerning the minister of the Town, with a red face and a girdle. So to bed, where we lay and sleep well.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-5-5">5th (Lord’s day)</time>. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed and I went to the red-faced Parson’s church, and heard a good sermon of him, better than I looked for. Then home, and had a good dinner, and after dinner fell in some talk in Divinity with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Stevens that kept us till it was past Church time. Anon we walked into the garden, and there played the fool a great while, trying who of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed or I could go best over the edge of an old fountain well, and I won a quart of sack of him. Then to supper in the banquet house, and there my wife and I did talk high, she against and I for <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Pierce (that she was a beauty), till we were both angry. Then to walk in the fields, and so to our quarters, and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-5-6">6th</time>. Up by four o’clock and took coach. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed rode, and left us that we know not whither he went. We went on, thinking to be at home before the officers rose, but finding we could not we staid by the way and eat some cakes, and so home, where I was much troubled to see no more work done in my absence than there was, but it could not be helped. I sent my wife to my father’s, and I went and sat till late with my Lady Batten, both the Sir Williams being gone this day to pay off some ships at Deptford. So home and to bed without seeing of them. I hear tonight that the Duke of York’s son is this day dead, which I believe will please every body; and I hear that the Duke and his Lady themselves are not much troubled at it.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-5-7">7th</time>. In the morning to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coventry, Sir <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Carteret, and my Lord’s to give them an account of my return. My Lady, I find, is, since my going, gone to the Wardrobe. Then with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed into London, to several places about his and my business, being much stopped in our way by the City traynebands, who go in much solemnity and pomp this day to muster before the King and the Duke, and shops in the City are shut up every where all this day. He carried me to an ordinary by the Old Exchange, where we come a little too late, but we had very good cheer for our 18<abbr class="currency">d.</abbr> apiece, and an excellent droll too, my host, and his wife so fine a woman; and sung and played so well that I staid a great while and drunk a great deal of wine. Then home and staid among my workmen all day, and took order for things for the finishing of their work, and so at night to Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten’s, and there supped and so home and to bed, having sent my Lord a letter tonight to excuse myself for not going with him tomorrow to the Hope, whither he is to go to see in what condition the fleet is in.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-5-8">8th</time>. This morning came my brother John to take his leave of me, he being to return to Cambridge tomorrow, and after I had chid him for going with my Will the other day to Deptford with the principal officers, I did give him some good counsell and 20<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> in money, and so he went away. All this day I staid at home with my workmen without eating anything, and took much pleasure to see my work go forward. At night comes my wife not well from my father’s, having had a fore-tooth drawn out today, which do trouble me, and the more because I am now in the greatest of all my dirt. My Will also returned tonight pretty well, he being gone yesterday not very well to his father’s. Today I received a letter from my uncle, to beg an old fiddle of me for my Cozen Perkin, the miller, whose mill the wind hath lately broke down, and now he hath nothing to live by but fiddling, and he must needs have it against Whitsuntide to play to the country girls; but it vexed me to see how my uncle writes to me, as if he were not able to buy him one. But I intend tomorrow to send him one. At night I set down my journal of my late journey to this time, and so to bed. My wife not being well and I very angry with her for her coming hither in that condition.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-5-9">9th</time>. With my workmen all the morning, my wife being ill and in great pain with her old pain, which troubled me much because that my house is in this condition of dirt. In the afternoon I went to Whitehall and there spoke with my Lord at his lodgings, and there being with him my Lord Chamberlain, I spoke for my old waterman Payne, to get into White’s place, who was waterman to my Lord Chamberlain, and is now to go master of the barge to my Lord to sea, and my Lord Chamberlain did promise that Payne should be entertained in White’s place with him. From thence to Sir <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Carteret, and there did get his promise for the payment of the remainder of the bill of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed’s, wherein of late I have been so much concerned, which did so much rejoice me that I meeting with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Childe took him to the Swan Tavern in King Street, and there did give him a tankard of white wine and sugar<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-322" id="noteref-322" epub:type="noteref">322</a> and so I went by water home and set myself to get my Lord’s accounts made up, which was till nine at night before I could finish, and then I walked to the Wardrobe, being the first time I was there since my Lady came thither, who I found all alone, and so she showed me all the lodgings as they are now fitted, and they seem pretty pleasant. By and by comes in my Lord, and so, after looking over my accounts, I returned home, being a dirty and dark walk. So to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-5-10">10th</time>. At the office all the morning, and the afternoon among my workmen with great pleasure, because being near an end of their work. This afternoon came <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blackburn and Creed to see me, and I took them to the Dolphin, and there drank a great deal of Rhenish wine with them and so home, having some talk with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Blackburn about his kinsman my Will, and he did give me good satisfaction in that it is his desire that his kinsman should do me all service, and that he would give him the best counsel he could to make him good. Which I begin of late to fear that he will not because of the bad company that I find that he do begin to take. This afternoon <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hater received for me the £225 due upon <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed’s bill in which I am concerned so much, which do make me very glad. At night to Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten and sat a while. So to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-5-11">11th</time>. This morning I went by water with Payne (<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore being with me) to my Lord Chamberlain at Whitehall, and there spoke with my Lord, and he did accept of Payne for his waterman, as I had lately endeavoured to get him to be. After that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cooling did give Payne an order to be entertained, and so I left him and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore, and I went to Graye’s Inne, and there to a barber’s, where I was trimmed, and had my haire cut, in which I am lately become a little curious, finding that the length of it do become me very much. So, calling at my father’s, I went home, and there staid and saw my workmen follow their work, which this night is brought to a very good condition. This afternoon <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shepley, Moore, and Creed came to me all about their several accounts with me, and we did something with them all, and so they went away. This evening <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hater brought my last quarter’s salary, of which I was very glad, because I have lost my first bill for it, and so this morning was forced to get another signed by three of my fellow officers for it. All this evening till late setting my accounts and papers in order, and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-5-12">12th</time>. My wife had a very troublesome night this night and in great pain, but about the morning her swelling broke, and she was in great ease presently as she useth to be. So I put in a vent (which <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Williams sent me yesterday) into the hole to keep it open till all the matter be come out, and so I question not that she will soon be well again. I staid at home all this morning, being the Lord’s day, making up my private accounts and setting papers in order. At noon went with my Lady Montagu at the Wardrobe, but I found it so late that I came back again, and so dined with my wife in her chamber. After dinner I went awhile to my chamber to set my papers right. Then I walked forth towards Westminster and at the Savoy heard <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Fuller preach upon David’s words, “I will wait with patience all the days of my appointed time until my change comes;” but methought it was a poor dry sermon. And I am afeard my former high esteem of his preaching was more out of opinion than judgment. From thence homewards, but met with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed, with whom I went and walked in Grayes-Inn-walks, and from thence to Islington, and there eat and drank at the house my father and we were wont of old to go to; and after that walked homeward, and parted in Smithfield: and so I home, much wondering to see how things are altered with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed, who, twelve months ago, might have been got to hang himself almost as soon as go to a drinking-house on a Sunday.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-5-13">13th</time>. All the morning at home among my workmen. At noon <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed and I went to the ordinary behind the Exchange, where we lately were, but I do not like it so well as I did. So home with him and to the office, where we sat late, and he did deliver his accounts to us. The office being done I went home and took pleasure to see my work draw to an end.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-5-14">14th</time>. Up early and by water to Whitehall to my Lord, and there had much talk with him about getting some money for him. He told me of his intention to get the Muster Master’s place for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierce, the purser, who he has a mind to carry to sea with him, and spoke very slightingly of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed, as that he had no opinion at all of him, but only he was forced to make use of him because of his present accounts. Thence to drink with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shepley and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pinkny, and so home and among my workmen all day. In the evening <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shepley came to me for some money, and so he and I to the Mitre, and there we had good wine and a gammon of bacon. My uncle Wight, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Talbot, and others were with us, and we were pretty merry. So at night home and to bed. Finding my head grow weak nowadays if I come to drink wine, and therefore hope that I shall leave it off of myself, which I pray God I could do.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-5-15">15th</time>. With my workmen all day till the afternoon, and then to the office, where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed’s accounts were passed. Home and found all my joyner’s work now done, but only a small job or two, which please me very well. This afternoon there came two men with an order from a Committee of Lords to demand some books of me out of the office, in order to the examining of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hutchinson’s accounts, but I give them a surly answer, and they went away to complain, which put me into some trouble with myself, but I resolve to go tomorrow myself to these Lords and answer them. To bed, being in great fear because of the shavings which lay all up and down the house and cellar, for fear of fire.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-5-16">16th</time>. Up early to see whether the work of my house be quite done, and I found it to my mind. Staid at home all the morning, and about 2 o’clock went in my velvet coat by water to the Savoy, and there, having staid a good while, I was called into the Lords, and there, quite contrary to my expectations, they did treat me very civilly, telling me that what they had done was out of zeal to the King’s service, and that they would joyne with the governors of the chest with all their hearts, since they knew that there was any, which they did not before. I give them very respectful answer and so went away to the Theatre, and there saw the latter end of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Mayd’s Tragedy</i>, which I never saw before, and methinks it is too sad and melancholy. Thence homewards, and meeting <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed I took him by water to the Wardrobe with me, and there we found my Lord newly gone away with the Duke of Ormond and some others, whom he had had to the collation; and so we, with the rest of the servants in the hall, sat down and eat of the best cold meats that ever I eat on in all my life. From thence I went home (<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore with me to the waterside, telling me how kindly he is used by my Lord and my Lady since his coming hither as a servant), and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-5-17">17th</time>. All the morning at home. At noon Lieutenant Lambert came to me, and he and I to the Exchange, and thence to an ordinary over against it, where to our dinner we had a fellow play well upon the bagpipes and whistle like a bird exceeding well, and I had a fancy to learn to whistle as he do, and did promise to come some other day and give him an angell to teach me. To the office, and sat there all the afternoon till 9 at night. So home to my musique, and my wife and I sat singing in my chamber a good while together, and then to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-5-18">18th</time>. Towards Westminster, from the Towre, by water, and was fain to stand upon one of the piers about the bridge,<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-323" id="noteref-323" epub:type="noteref">323</a> before the men could drag their boat through the lock, and which they could not do till another was called to help them. Being through bridge I found the Thames full of boats and gallys, and upon inquiry found that there was a wager to be run this morning. So spying of Payne in a gully, I went into him, and there staid, thinking to have gone to Chelsy with them. But upon, the start, the wager boats fell foul one of another, till at last one of them gives over, pretending foul play, and so the other row away alone, and all our sport lost. So, I went ashore, at Westminster; and to the Hall I went, where it was very pleasant to see the Hall in the condition it is now with the judges on the benches at the further end of it, which I had not seen all this term till now. Thence with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Spicer, Creed and some others to drink. And so away homewards by water with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed, whom I left in London going about business and I home, where I staid all the afternoon in the garden reading <i epub:type="se:name.publication.essay">Faber Fortunæ</i> with great pleasure. So home to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-5-19">19th</time>. (Lord’s day) I walked in the morning towards Westminster, and seeing many people at York House, I went down and found them at mass, it being the Spanish ambassodors; and so I go into one of the gallerys, and there heard two masses done, I think, not in so much state as I have seen them heretofore. After that into the garden, and walked a turn or two, but found it not so fine a place as I always took it for by the outside. Thence to my Lord’s and there spake with him about business, and then he went to Whitehall to dinner, and <abbr>Capt.</abbr> Ferrers and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Howe and myself to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wilkinson’s at the Crown, and though he had no meat of his own, yet we happened to find our cook <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Robinson there, who had a dinner for himself and some friends, and so he did give us a very fine dinner. Then to my Lord’s, where we went and sat talking and laughing in the drawing-room a great while. All our talk about their going to sea this voyage, which <abbr>Capt.</abbr> Ferrers is in some doubt whether he shall go or no, but swears that he would go, if he were sure never to come back again; and I, giving him some hopes, he grew so mad with joy that he fell a-dancing and leaping like a madman. Now it fell out so that the balcone windows were open, and he went to the rayle and made an offer to leap over, and asked what if he should leap over there. I told him I would give him £40 if he did not go to sea. With that thought I shut the doors, and <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Howe hindered him all we could; yet he opened them again, and, with a vault, leaps down into the garden:⁠—the greatest and most desperate frolic that ever I saw in my life. I run to see what was become of him, and we found him crawled upon his knees, but could not rise; so we went down into the garden and dragged him to the bench, where he looked like a dead man, but could not stir; and, though he had broke nothing, yet his pain in his back was such as he could not endure. With this, my Lord (who was in the little new room) come to us in amaze, and bid us carry him up, which, by our strength, we did, and so laid him in East’s bed, by the door; where he lay in great pain. We sent for a doctor and chyrurgeon, but none to be found, till by-and-by by chance comes in <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Clerke, who is afeard of him. So we sent to get a lodging for him, and I went up to my Lord, where Captain Cooke, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gibbons, and others of the King’s musicians were come to present my Lord with some songs and symphonys, which were performed very finely. Which being done I took leave and supped at my father’s, where was my cozen Beck come lately out of the country. I am troubled to see my father so much decay of a suddain, as he do both in his seeing and hearing, and as much to hear of him how my brother Tom do grow disrespectful to him and my mother. I took leave and went home, where to prayers (which I have not had in my house a good while), and so to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-5-20">20th</time>. At home all the morning; paid £50 to one <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Grant for <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Barlow, for the last half year, and was visited by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Anderson, my former chamber fellow at Cambridge, with whom I parted at the Hague, but I did not go forthwith him, only gave him a morning draft at home. At noon <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed came to me, and he and I to the Exchange, and so to an ordinary to dinner, and after dinner to the Mitre, and there sat drinking while it rained very much. Then to the office, where I found Sir Williams both, choosing of masters for the new fleet of ships that is ordered to be set forth, and Pen seeming to be in an ugly humour, not willing to gratify one that I mentioned to be put in, did vex me. We sat late, and so home. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore came to me when I was going to bed, and sat with me a good while talking about my Lord’s business and our own and so good night.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-5-21">21st</time>. Up early, and, with Sir <abbr class="name">R.</abbr> Slingsby (and Major Waters the deaf gentleman, his friend, for company’s sake) to the Victualling-office (the first time that I ever knew where it was), and there staid while he read a commission for enquiry into some of the King’s lands and houses thereabouts, that are given his brother. And then we took boat to Woolwich, where we staid and gave order for the fitting out of some more ships presently. And then to Deptford, where we staid and did the same; and so took barge again, and were overtaken by the King in his barge, he having been down the river with his yacht this day for pleasure to try it; and, as I hear, Commissioner Pett’s do prove better than the Dutch one, and that that his brother built. While we were upon the water, one of the greatest showers of rain fell that ever I saw. The Comptroller and I landed with our barge at the Temple, and from thence I went to my father’s, and there did give order about some clothes to be made, and did buy a new hat, cost between 20 and 30 shillings, at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Holden’s. So home.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-5-22">22nd</time>. To Westminster, and there missed of my Lord, and so about noon I and <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Howe by water to the Wardrobe, where my Lord and all the officers of the Wardrobe dined, and several other friends of my Lord, at a venison pasty. Before dinner, my Lady Wright and my Lady <abbr class="name">Jem.</abbr> sang songs to the harpsicon. Very pleasant and merry at dinner. And then I went away by water to the office, and there staid till it was late. At night before I went to bed the barber came to trim me and wash me, and so to bed, in order to my being clean tomorrow.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-5-23">23rd</time>. This day I went to my Lord, and about many other things at Whitehall, and there made even my accounts with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shepley at my Lord’s, and then with him and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore and John Bowles to the Rhenish wine house, and there came Jonas Moore, the mathematician, to us, and there he did by discourse make us fully believe that England and France were once the same continent, by very good arguments, and spoke very many things, not so much to prove the Scripture false as that the time therein is not well computed nor understood. From thence home by water, and there shifted myself into my black silk suit (the first day I have put it on this year), and so to my Lord Mayor’s by coach, with a great deal of honourable company, and great entertainment. At table I had very good discourse with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ashmole, wherein he did assure me that frogs and many insects do often fall from the sky, ready formed. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Bates’s singularity in not rising up nor drinking the King’s nor other healths at the table was very much observed.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-324" id="noteref-324" epub:type="noteref">324</a> From thence we all took coach, and to our office, and there sat till it was late; and so I home and to bed by daylight. This day was kept a holy-day through the town; and it pleased me to see the little boys walk up and down in procession with their broom-staffs in their hands, as I had myself long ago gone.<a href="../text/endnotes.xhtml#note-325" id="noteref-325" epub:type="noteref">325</a></p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-5-24">24th</time>. At home all the morning making up my private accounts, and this is the first time that I do find myself to be clearly worth £500 in money, besides all my goods in my house, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> In the afternoon at the office late, and then I went to the Wardrobe, where I found my Lord at supper, and therefore I walked a good while till he had done, and I went in to him, and there he looked over my accounts. And they were committed to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore to see me paid what remained due to me. Then down to the kitchen to eat a bit of bread and butter, which I did, and there I took one of the maids by the chin, thinking her to be Susan, but it proved to be her sister, who is very like her. From thence home.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-5-25">25th</time>. All the morning at home about business. At noon to the Temple, where I staid and looked over a book or two at Playford’s, and then to the Theatre, where I saw a piece of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Silent Woman</i>, which pleased me. So homewards, and in my way bought <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Bondman</i> in Paul’s Churchyard, and so home, where I found all clean, and the hearth and range, as it is now enlarged, set up, which pleases me very much.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-5-26">26th (Lord’s day)</time>. Lay long in bed. To church and heard a good sermon at our own church, where I have not been a great many weeks. Dined with my wife alone at home pleasing myself in that my house do begin to look as if at last it would be in good order. This day the Parliament received the communion of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Gunning at <abbr>St.</abbr> Margaret’s, Westminster. In the afternoon both the Sir Williams came to church, where we had a dull stranger. After church home, and so to the Mitre, where I found <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Burnett, the first time that ever I met him to drink with him, and my uncle Wight and there we sat and drank a great deal, and so I to Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten’s, where I have on purpose made myself a great stranger, only to get a high opinion a little more of myself in them. Here I heard how <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Browne, Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten’s sister, is brought to bed, and I to be one of the godfathers, which I could not nor did deny. Which, however, did trouble me very much to be at charge to no purpose, so that I could not sleep hardly all night, but in the morning I bethought myself, and I think it is very well I should do it. Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten told me how <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Prin (among the two or three that did refuse today to receive the sacrament upon their knees) was offered by a mistake the drink afterwards, which he did receive, being denied the drink by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Gunning, unless he would take it on his knees; and after that by another the bread was brought him, and he did take it sitting, which is thought very preposterous. Home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-5-27">27th</time>. To the Wardrobe, and from thence with my Lords Sandwich and Hinchinbroke to the Lords’ House by boat at Westminster, and there I left them. Then to the lobby, and after waiting for Sir <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Downing’s coming out, to speak with him about the giving me up of my bond for my honesty when I was his clerk, but to no purpose, I went to Clerke’s at the Legg, and there I found both <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pierces, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rolt, formerly too great a man to meet upon such even terms, and there we dined very merry, there coming to us Captain Ferrers, this being the first day of his going abroad since his leap a week ago, which I was greatly glad to see. By water to the office, and there sat late, Sir George Carteret coming in, who among other things did inquire into the naming of the maisters for this fleet, and was very angry that they were named as they are, and above all to see the maister of the Adventure (for whom there is some kind of difference between Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen and me) turned out, who has been in her list. The office done, I went with the Comptroller to the Coffee house, and there we discoursed of this, and I seem to be fond of him, and indeed I find I must carry fair with all as far as I see it safe, but I have got of him leave to have a little room from his lodgings to my house, of which I am very glad, besides I do open him a way to get lodgings himself in the office, of which I should be very glad. Home and to bed.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-5-28">28th</time>. This morning to the Wardrobe, and thence to a little alehouse hard by, to drink with John Bowies, who is now going to Hinchinbroke this day. Thence with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shepley to the Exchange about business, and there, by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rawlinson’s favour, got into a balcone over against the Exchange; and there saw the hangman burn, by vote of Parliament, two old acts, the one for constituting us a Commonwealth, and the others I have forgot. Which still do make me think of the greatness of this late turn, and what people will do tomorrow against what they all, through profit or fear, did promise and practise this day. Then to the Mitre with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shepley, and there dined with <abbr class="name">D.</abbr> Rawlinson and some friends of his very well. So home, and then to Cheapside about buying a piece of plate to give away tomorrow to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Browne’s child. So to the Star in Cheapside, where I left <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore telling £5 out for me, who I found in a great strait for my coming back again, and so he went his way at my coming. Then home, where <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cook I met and he paid me 30<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr>, an old debt of his to me. So to Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen’s, and there sat alone with him till ten at night in talk with great content, he telling me things and persons that I did not understand in the late times, and so I home to bed. My cozen John Holcroft (whom I have not seen many years) this morning came to see me.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-5-29">29th (King’s birthday)</time>. Rose early and having made myself fine, and put six spoons and a porringer of silver in my pocket to give away today, Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen and I took coach, and (the weather and ways being foul) went to Walthamstowe; and being come there heard <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Radcliffe, my former school fellow at Paul’s (who is yet a mere boy), preach upon “Nay, let him take all, since my Lord the King is returned,” <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> He reads all, and his sermon very simple, but I looked for new matter. Back to dinner to Sir William Batten’s; and then, after a walk in the fine gardens, we went to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Browne’s, where Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen and I were godfathers, and <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jordan and Shipman godmothers to her boy. And there, before and after the christening; we were with the woman above in her chamber; but whether we carried ourselves well or ill, I know not; but I was directed by young <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Batten. One passage of a lady that eat wafers with her dog did a little displease me. I did give the midwife 10<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> and the nurse 5<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> and the maid of the house 2<abbr class="currency eoc">s.</abbr> But for as much I expected to give the name to the child, but did not (it being called John), I forbore then to give my plate till another time after a little more advice. All being done, we went to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Shipman’s, who is a great butter-woman, and I did see there the most of milk and cream, and the cleanest that ever I saw in my life. After we had filled our bellies with cream, we took our leaves and away. In our way, we had great sport to try who should drive fastest, Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten’s coach, or Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen’s chariott, they having four, and we two horses, and we beat them. But it cost me the spoiling of my clothes and velvet coat with dirt. Being come home I to bed, and give my breeches to be dried by the fire against tomorrow.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-5-30">30th</time>. To the Wardrobe and there, with my Lord, went into his new barge to try her, and found her a good boat, and like my Lord’s contrivance of the door to come out round and not square as they used to do. Back to the Wardrobe with my Lord, and then with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moore to the Temple, and thence to. Greatorex, who took me to Arundell-House, and there showed me some fine flowers in his garden, and all the fine statues in the gallery, which I formerly had seen, and is a brave sight, and thence to a blind dark cellar, where we had two bottles of good ale, and so after giving him direction for my silver side-table, I took boat at Arundell stairs, and put in at Milford. … So home and found Sir Williams both and my Lady going to Deptford to christen Captain Rooth’s child, and would have had me with them, but I could not go. To the office, where Sir <abbr class="name">R.</abbr> Slingsby was, and he and I into his and my lodgings to take a view of them, out of a desire he has to have mine of me to join to his, and give me <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Turner’s. To the office again, where Sir <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Carteret came and sat a while, he being angry for Sir Williams making of the maisters of this fleet upon their own heads without a full table. Then the Comptroller and I to the Coffee House, and there sat a great while talking of many things. So home and to bed. This day, I hear, the Parliament have ordered a bill to be brought in for the restoring the Bishops to the House of Lords; which they had not done so soon but to spite <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Prin, who is every day so bitter against them in his discourse in the House.</p>
			</article>
			<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
				<p><time datetime="1661-5-31">31st</time>. I went to my father’s thinking to have met with my cozen John Holcroft, but he came not, but to my great grief I found my father and mother in a great deal of discontent one with another, and indeed my mother is grown now so pettish that I know not how my father is able to bear with it. I did talk to her so as did not indeed become me, but I could not help it, she being so unsufferably foolish and simple, so that my father, poor man, is become a very unhappy man. There I dined, and so home and to the office all the afternoon till 9 at night, and then home and to supper and to bed. Great talk now how the Parliament intend to make a collection of free gifts to the King through the Kingdom; but I think it will not come to much.</p>
			</article>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
