<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="rearnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li id="note-1" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Shelton’s work was frequently reprinted, and the edition of 1691 is in the Pepysian Library. The late <abbr>Mr.</abbr> John <abbr class="name">E.</abbr> Bailey read a very interesting paper on <i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">The Cipher of Pepys’s Diary</i>, before the Manchester Literary Club, on December 14th, 1875, an abstract of which has been printed. <a href="../text/foreword.xhtml#noteref-1" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-2" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">W. C.</abbr> Pepys has paid great attention to the history of his family, and in 1887 he published an interesting work entitled <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Genealogy of the Pepys Family, 1273⁠–⁠1887</i>, London, George Bell and Sons, which contains the fullest pedigrees of the family yet issued. <a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-2" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-3" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>February 10th, 1661⁠–⁠62. <a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-3" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-4" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“We went through Horslydown, where I never was since a little boy, that I went to enquire after my father, whom we did give over for lost coming from Holland.”</p>
						<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diary</i>, <abbr>Jan.</abbr> 24th, 1665-66</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>John Pepys appears, from the State Papers, to have visited Holland as late as 1656.</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“That passes be graunted to goe beyond y<sup>e</sup> seas to y<sup>p</sup>e persons following, viz<sup>t</sup>, To John Pepys and his man, with necessaryes for Holland, being on the desire of M<sup>r</sup> Sam<sup>ll</sup> Pepys.</p>
						<p>“Ordered by the Council, Thursday, 7<sup>th</sup> August, 1656.”</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p><a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-4" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-5" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diary</i>, June 17th, 1666. <a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-5" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-6" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The following is a copy of John Pepys’s will:</p>
					<blockquote>
						<header>
							<p>
								<b>“My Father’s Will.</b>
							</p>
							<p>[Endorsement by <abbr class="name">S.</abbr> Pepys.]</p>
						</header>
						<p>“Memorandum. That I, John Pepys of Ellington, in the county of Huntingdon, Gent<sup>n</sup>, doe declare my mind in the disposall of my worldly goods as followeth:</p>
						<p>“First, I desire that my lands and goods left mee by my brother, Robert Pepys, deceased, bee delivered up to my eldest son, Samuell Pepys, of London, <abbr>Esqr.</abbr>, according as is expressed in the last Will of my brother Robert aforesaid.</p>
						<p>“Secondly, As for what goods I have brought from London, or procured since, and what moneys I shall leave behind me or due to me, I desire may be disposed of as followeth:</p>
						<p>“Imprimis, I give to the stock of the poore of the parish of Brampton, in which church I desire to be enterred, five pounds.</p>
						<p>“Item. I give to the Poore of Ellington forty shillings.</p>
						<p>“Item. I desire that my two grandsons, Samuell and John Jackson, have ten pounds a piece.</p>
						<p>“Item. I desire that my daughter, Paulina Jackson, may have my largest silver tankerd.</p>
						<p>“Item. I desire that my son John Pepys may have my gold seale-ring.</p>
						<p>“Lastly. I desire that the remainder of what I shall leave be equally distributed between my sons Samuel and John Pepys and my daughter Paulina Jackson.</p>
						<p>“All which I leave to the care of my eldest son Samuel Pepys, to see performed, if he shall think fit.</p>
						<p>“In witness hereunto I set my hand.”</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-6" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-7" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Pepys tells us (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diary</i>, <abbr>Dec.</abbr> 31st, 1664) that his father and mother were married at Newington in Surrey, on October 15th, 1626, but although the register of marriages of <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary, Newington, has been searched, the certificate of the marriage has not been found, and the maiden name of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> John Pepys is still unknown. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Osmund Airy suggests, in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Encyclopædia Britannica</i>, the possibility that her maiden name may have been Perkins, and refers to an uncle and aunt Perkins who lived in poverty in the Fens near Wisbeach. I believe, however, that these Perkins were connections on the father’s rather than on the mother’s side. Jane Pepys, youngest sister of Samuel’s father, married Perkin. The suggestion, nevertheless, is useful, as it draws attention to the possibility of some of the cousins and aunts to whom we can find no clue, having been relations on the mother’s side. <a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-7" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-8" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diary</i>, April 25th, 1664. <a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-8" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-9" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>May 12th, 1667. <a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-9" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-10" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>March 15th, 1659–60. <a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-10" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-11" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Lord Braybrooke says Trinity <em>College</em>, but his statement does not agree with the information given in the extracts from the Magdalene College register books quoted in the note on <abbr>p.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvii</span>, where we find the words, “in Aula Trin.” I have made inquiries in order to settle this point, but the result is only negative. The Master of Trinity Hall has been so good as to inform me that the registers of his college do not go back so far as this date, and through the kindness of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">J. W. L.</abbr> Glaisher, <abbr>F.R.S.</abbr>, Fellow of Trinity College, I learn that Pepys’s name does not occur in the registers of that college, and that there is no reason to suspect any omissions in the registers. As there is thus much evidence against his admission at Trinity College, it seems but fair to accept the evidence of the books of Magdalene College until they are proved to be incorrect. <a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-11" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-12" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“Went to reside in <abbr>Magl. Coll. Camb.</abbr>, and did put on my gown first, March 5, 1650–51.”</p>
						<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diary</i>, <abbr>Dec.</abbr> 31st, 1664</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-12" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-13" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mynors Bright has printed the following extracts from the entry and register books of Magdalene College, which refer to these movements:</p>
					<blockquote xml:lang="la">
						<p>“<time datetime="1650-10-1"><abbr>Oct.</abbr> 1, 1650</time>. Samuell Peapys filius Johannis Peapys civis Londinensis annos natus—è scholâ Paulina admissus est Sizator, Tutore D<sup>oc</sup> Morland.</p>
						<p>“Mem, eū prius admissū fuisse in Aulâ Trin: 21 die Junii ejusdem añi, ut patet ex testif. M<sup>ri</sup> Twells ibidem Socio, <abbr>dat. Mar.</abbr> 4 165<sup>0</sup>/<sub>1</sub>, quo die etiū in ordinē transijt Pensionariorum apud nos.”</p>
						<p>“<time datetime="1651-4-3">Aprilis 3°, 1651</time>. Ego Samuel Pepys electus fui et admissus in discipulum hujus Collegij pro Magistro Spenluff.”</p>
						<p>“<time datetime="1653-10-4">Octob. 4°, 1653</time>. Ego Samuel Pepys electus fui et admissus in discipulum hujus Collegij pro Magistro Johanne Smyth.”</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>These entries are also printed in the Appendix to the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Fifth Report of the Historical <abbr>MSS.</abbr> Commission</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 484. <a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-13" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-14" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>October 21st, 1653.</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“Memorandum: that Peapys and Hind were solemnly admonished by myself and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hill, for having been scandalously over-served with drink y<sup>e</sup> night before. This was done in the presence of all the Fellows then resident, in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hill’s chamber.⁠—<span class="signature">John Wood</span>, Registrar.”</p>
						<cite>From the Registrar’s-book of Magdalene College</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-14" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-15" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>There is no information at the Registry of the University which throws any light upon the question whether Pepys was first entered at Trinity College or Trinity Hall, but <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Charles <abbr class="name">E.</abbr> Grant, <abbr>M.A.</abbr>, has kindly informed me that “Sam : Peapys” matriculated as a pensioner at Magdalene on July 4th, 1651, and was a <abbr>B.A.</abbr> of 1653. <a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-15" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-16" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>These particulars are obtained from an interesting letter from Balthasar <abbr>St.</abbr> Michel to Pepys, dated “Deal, <abbr>Feb.</abbr> 8, 1673⁠–⁠4,” and printed in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life, Journals, and Correspondence of Samuel Pepys</i>, 1841, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 146⁠–⁠53. <a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-16" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-17" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The late <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">T. C.</abbr> Noble kindly communicated to me a copy of the original marriage certificate, which is as follows: “Samuell Peps of this parish <abbr>Gent.</abbr> &amp; Elizabeth De <abbr>S<sup>nt</sup>.</abbr> Michell of Martins in the fields, Spinster. Published October 19tn, 22nd, 29th 1655, and were married by Richard Sherwin <abbr>Esqr</abbr> one of the justices of the Peace of the Cittie and Lyberties of <abbr>Westm<sup>r</sup></abbr> December 1st. (Signed) <abbr>Ri.</abbr> Sherwin.” <a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-17" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-18" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“June 10th, 1669. I went this evening to London, to carry <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pepys to my brother Richard, now exceedingly afflicted with the stone, who had been successfully cut, and carried the stone, as big as a tennis ball, to show him and encourage his resolution to go thro’ the operation.”</p>
						<cite>Evelyn’s Diary.</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-18" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-19" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Nov.</abbr> 7th, 1660. See also <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diary</i>, March 8th, 1662–63. <a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-19" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-20" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diary</i>, <abbr>Jan.</abbr> 30th, 1659–60: “I taking my £12 10<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> 0<abbr class="currency">d.</abbr> due to me for my last quarter’s salary.” <a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-20" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-21" epub:type="rearnote">
					<table>
						<caption>A List of such Shipps as were at Sceaueling in attending on his Ma<sup>ty</sup> at his returne to England, with an Account of the then Commanders in each Ship, as also an Account of the Gratuity: from a paper in the British Museum. (<time datetime="1660-6-19">June 19th, 1660</time>)</caption>
						<thead>
							<tr>
								<th>Names.</th>
								<th>Commanders</th>
								<th>Men.</th>
								<th>Guns.</th>
								<th colspan="3">Gratuities.</th>
							</tr>
						</thead>
						<tbody>
							<tr>
								<td><i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Naseby</i>, alias <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Charles</i></td>
								<td>Roger Cuttance</td>
								<td>500</td>
								<td>80</td>
								<td>801</td>
								<td>19</td>
								<td>6</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td><i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">London</i></td>
								<td>John Lawson</td>
								<td>360</td>
								<td>64</td>
								<td>580</td>
								<td>13</td>
								<td>6</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td><i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Swiftsure</i></td>
								<td>Sir Rich<sup>d</sup> Stayner</td>
								<td>300</td>
								<td>40</td>
								<td>444</td>
								<td>13</td>
								<td>6</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td><i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Speaker</i>, alias <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Mary</i></td>
								<td><abbr class="name">Rob.</abbr> Clarke</td>
								<td>220</td>
								<td>52</td>
								<td>295</td>
								<td>17</td>
								<td>0</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td><i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Centurion</i></td>
								<td>John Parke</td>
								<td>150</td>
								<td>40</td>
								<td>209</td>
								<td>17</td>
								<td>0</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td><i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Plymouth</i></td>
								<td><abbr class="name">Jo.</abbr> Haywarde</td>
								<td>260</td>
								<td>54</td>
								<td>298</td>
								<td>7</td>
								<td>10</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td><i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Cherriton</i>, alias <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Speedwell</i></td>
								<td>Henry Cuttance</td>
								<td>90</td>
								<td>20</td>
								<td>122</td>
								<td>15</td>
								<td>6</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td><i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Dartmouth</i></td>
								<td>Rich<sup>d</sup> Rooth</td>
								<td>100</td>
								<td>22</td>
								<td>134</td>
								<td>4</td>
								<td>2</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td><i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Lark</i></td>
								<td><abbr class="name">Tho.</abbr> Levidge</td>
								<td>40</td>
								<td>10</td>
								<td>57</td>
								<td>6</td>
								<td>8</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td><i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Hinde</i></td>
								<td>Rich<sup>d</sup> Country</td>
								<td>35</td>
								<td>6</td>
								<td>55</td>
								<td>15</td>
								<td>8</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td><i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nonsuch</i> frigate</td>
								<td>John Parker</td>
								<td>120</td>
								<td>34</td>
								<td>194</td>
								<td>18</td>
								<td>0</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td><i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Norwich</i></td>
								<td><abbr class="name">Mich.</abbr> Untton</td>
								<td>100</td>
								<td>22</td>
								<td>133</td>
								<td>0</td>
								<td>0</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td><i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Winsby</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Happy Return</i></td>
								<td>Joseph Ames</td>
								<td>160</td>
								<td>44</td>
								<td>173</td>
								<td>6</td>
								<td>9</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td><i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Royal James</i></td>
								<td>John Stoakes</td>
								<td>400</td>
								<td>70</td>
								<td>369</td>
								<td>4</td>
								<td>3</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td><i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Lamport</i>, alias <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Henrietta</i></td>
								<td>John Coppin</td>
								<td>210</td>
								<td>50</td>
								<td>274</td>
								<td>1</td>
								<td>4</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td><i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Essex</i></td>
								<td><abbr class="name">Tho.</abbr> Bunn</td>
								<td>200</td>
								<td>48</td>
								<td>210</td>
								<td>2</td>
								<td>2</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td><i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Portsmouth</i></td>
								<td><abbr class="name">Rob.</abbr> Sansum</td>
								<td>130</td>
								<td>38</td>
								<td>155</td>
								<td>6</td>
								<td>3</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td><i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Yarmouth</i></td>
								<td><abbr class="name">Cha.</abbr> Wager</td>
								<td>160</td>
								<td>44</td>
								<td>215</td>
								<td>2</td>
								<td>0</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td><i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Assistance</i></td>
								<td>Tho<sup>s</sup> Sparling</td>
								<td>140</td>
								<td>40</td>
								<td>160</td>
								<td>17</td>
								<td>4</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td><i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Foresight</i></td>
								<td>Peter Mootham</td>
								<td>140</td>
								<td>40</td>
								<td>176</td>
								<td>19</td>
								<td>4</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td><i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Elias</i></td>
								<td>Mark Harrison</td>
								<td>110</td>
								<td>36</td>
								<td>172</td>
								<td>10</td>
								<td>3</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td><i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Bradford</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Success</i></td>
								<td>Peter Bower</td>
								<td>100</td>
								<td>24</td>
								<td>-</td>
								<td>-</td>
								<td>-</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td><i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Hampshire</i></td>
								<td>Henry Terne</td>
								<td>130</td>
								<td>38</td>
								<td>171</td>
								<td>9</td>
								<td>1</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td><i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Greyhound</i></td>
								<td><abbr class="name">Jerem.</abbr> Country</td>
								<td>85</td>
								<td>20</td>
								<td>95</td>
								<td>15</td>
								<td>10</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td><i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Francis</i></td>
								<td>Will<sup>m</sup> Dale</td>
								<td>45</td>
								<td>10</td>
								<td>37</td>
								<td>15</td>
								<td>6</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td><i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Lilly</i></td>
								<td>John Pearce</td>
								<td>35</td>
								<td>6</td>
								<td>46</td>
								<td>9</td>
								<td>9</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td><i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Hawk</i></td>
								<td>And<sup>w</sup> Ashford</td>
								<td>35</td>
								<td>8</td>
								<td>48</td>
								<td>16</td>
								<td>3</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td><i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Richmond</i>, formerly <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Wakefield</i></td>
								<td>John Pointz</td>
								<td>100</td>
								<td>22</td>
								<td>118</td>
								<td>2</td>
								<td>0</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td><i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Martin</i></td>
								<td>W<sup>m</sup> Burrowes</td>
								<td>50</td>
								<td>-</td>
								<td>-</td>
								<td>-</td>
								<td>-</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td><i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Merlyn</i></td>
								<td><abbr class="name">Edw.</abbr> Grove</td>
								<td>-</td>
								<td>-</td>
								<td>34</td>
								<td>16</td>
								<td>0</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td><i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Roe</i>, ketch</td>
								<td><abbr class="name">Tho.</abbr> Bowry</td>
								<td>-</td>
								<td>-</td>
								<td>51</td>
								<td>8</td>
								<td>0</td>
							</tr>
						</tbody>
					</table>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-21" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-22" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diary</i>, <abbr>Feb.</abbr> 9th, 1664–65. <a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-22" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-23" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diary</i>, <abbr>Feb.</abbr> 11th, 1667–68. <a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-23" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-24" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir Robert Brooke, Lord of the Manor of Wanstead from 1662 to 1667, <abbr>M.P.</abbr> for Aldborough 1660, 1661–69. He retired to France in bad circumstances, and from a letter among the Pepys <abbr>MSS.</abbr> it appears that he was drowned in the river at Lyons. <a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-24" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-25" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“The House then proceeding upon the debate touching the Election for Castle Rising, between <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pepys and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Offley, did, in the first place, take into consideration what related personally to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pepys. Information being given to the House that they had received an account from a person of quality, that he saw an Altar with a Crucifix upon it, in the house of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pepys; <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pepys, standing up in his place, did heartily and flatly deny that he ever had any Altar or Crucifix, or the image or picture of any Saint whatsoever in his house, from the top to the bottom of it; and the Members being called upon to name the person that gave them the information, they were unwilling to declare it without the order of the House; which, being made, they named the Earl of Shaftesbury; and the House being also informed that Sir <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Banks did likewise see the Altar, he was ordered to attend the Bar of the House, to declare what he knew of this matter. ‘Ordered that Sir William Coventry, Sir Thomas Meeres, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Garraway do attend Lord Shaftesbury on the like occasion, and receive what information his Lordship, can give on this matter.’ ”</p>
						<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Journals of the House of Commons</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 306.”</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“13th February, Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Coventry reports that they attended the Earl of Shaftesbury, and received from him the account which they had put in writing. The Earl of Shaftesbury denieth that he ever saw an Altar in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pepys’s house or lodgings; as to the Crucifix, he saith he hath, some imperfect memory of seeing somewhat which he conceived to be a Crucifix. When his Lordship was asked the time, he said it was before the burning of the Office of the Navy. Being asked concerning the manner, he said he could not remember whether it were painted or carved, or in what manner the thing was; and that his memory was so very imperfect in it, that if he were upon his oath he could give no testimony.”</p>
						<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Journals of the House of Commons</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 309.”</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“16th February⁠—Sir John Banks was called in⁠—The Speaker desired him to answer what acquaintance he had with; <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pepys, and whether he used to have recourse to him to his house and had ever seen there any Altar or Crucifix, or whether he knew of his being a Papist, or Popishly inclined. Sir <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Banks said that he had known and had been acquainted with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pepys several years, and had often visited him and conversed with him at the Navy Office, and at his house there upon several occasions, and that he never saw in his house there any Altar or Crucifix, and that he does not believe him to be a Papist, or that way inclined in the least, nor had any reason or ground to think or believe it.”</p>
						<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Journals of the House of Commons</i>, vol, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ix</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 310.</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-25" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-26" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Christie’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of the First Earl of Shaftesbury</i>," 1871, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 195-197. <a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-26" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-27" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The office generally known as Secretary of the Admiralty dates back many years, but the officer who filled it was sometimes Secretary to the Lord High Admiral, and sometimes to the Commission for that office. “His Majesties Letters Patent for y<sup>e</sup> erecting the office of Secretary of y<sup>e</sup> Admiralty of England, and creating Samuel Pepys, <abbr>Esq.</abbr>, first Secretary therein,” is dated June 10th, 1684. <a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-27" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-28" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Jesse’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Stuarts</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 326. <a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-28" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-29" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Raikes’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>Hon.</abbr> Artillery Company</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 196. <a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-29" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-30" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Cobbett’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Parliamentary History</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>, <abbr>cols.</abbr> 975, 976. <a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-30" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-31" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>In Sir <abbr class="name">G. F.</abbr> Duckett’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Naval Commissioners, 1660–1760</i> (privately printed, 1889), there are several particulars as to the life of Samuel Atkins. He was the son of “a colonel on the Parliament side in the late Rebellion,” and from 1670 to 1672 was clerk to Colonel Middleton, one of the Commissioners of the Navy, who died in the latter year. He was then clerk in Chatham Dockyard, and in 1674 “he went as junior clerk.… under <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hewer,” and afterwards chief or head-clerk under Pepys, to whom he is said to have been devoted. He was examined before a Committee of the House of Lords, and several times remanded back to Newgate touching the murder of Sir Edmund Berry Godfrey. He was eventually acquitted, and having influential friends he subsequently obtained several good appointments. He was a Commissioner of the Navy from 1694 to 1702, and in 1700 he was one of five Commissioners appointed by the House of Lords to state the accounts due to the Army. He died in 1706. An account of Atkins’s case, and other documents connected with Godfrey’s murder, will be found among the Rawlinson <abbr>MSS.</abbr> in the Bodleian Library, <abbr>A.</abbr> 173. References to Atkins are given in the House of Lords <abbr>MSS.</abbr> (“Historical <abbr>MSS.</abbr> Commission,” 11th Report, Appendix, part 2, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 49-151). <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">J. R.</abbr> Tanner communicated an interesting article on <i epub:type="se:name.publication.essay">Pepys and the Popish Plot</i> to the April number (1892) of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">English Historical Review</i>. He shows how the alibi which caused the jury to acquit Atkins without leaving the box was prepared by Pepys himself. <a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-31" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-32" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Scull’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dorothea Scott</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 16, 17. <a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-32" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-33" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>In connection with this period of disgrace the following is of interest:</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>[Endorsed—“The Coffee-House-Paper, wherein y<sup>e</sup> scandalous intelligence touching M<sup>r</sup> Pepys.”]</p>
						<p>“On Tuesday last, M<sup>r</sup> Peeps went to Windsor, having y<sup>e</sup> confidence y<sup>t</sup> he might kisse y<sup>e</sup> King’s hand; and being at Court, mett the Lord Chamberlain and made his complent to his Lordshipp. But his Lordshipp told him y<sup>e</sup> he wondered he should presume to come to Court before he had cleared himselfe, being charged with treason; whose answer was, his innocency was such, that he valued not any thing he was charged with; soe parted with his Lordshipp; but by the favour of some courtiers, he was brought into y<sup>e</sup> King’s presence: but so soon as his Maj<sup>tie</sup> saw him, he frowned and turned aside, showing his dislike of seeing him there.”</p>
						<cite>Extract from a paper without date</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>The following contradiction to this statement appeared in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">The Domestic Intelligencer, and News from Town and Country</i>, 15th and 26th September, 1679: “These are to give notice that all and every part of the relation published in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">The Domestic Intelligencer</i> the 9th of this instant September, is, as to the matter, and every particular circumstance therein mentioned, altogether false and scandalous, there having no such passage happened, nor any thing that might give occasion to that report.” <a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-33" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-34" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Scull’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dorothea Scott</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 21, 22. <a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-34" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-35" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John James, of Glentworth, <abbr>co.</abbr> Lincoln, had been servant to Sir William Coventry, and was recommended to Pepys by Sir <abbr class="name">R.</abbr> Mason. James’s evidence against Pepys is given in Grey’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Debates</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 304. <a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-35" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-36" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Pepys’s Life, Journals, and Correspondence</i>, 1841, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 216. <a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-36" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-37" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>William Harbord sat as <abbr>M.P.</abbr> for Thetford in several parliaments. In 1689 he was chosen on the Privy Council, and in 1690 became Vice-Treasurer for Ireland. He was appointed Ambassador to Turkey in 1692, and died at Belgrade in July of that year. <a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-37" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-38" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Scull’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dorothea Scott</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 74. <a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-38" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-39" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>It is included in the “Boscobel Tracts,” published with <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Grammont’s Memoirs</i> in Bohn’s Standard Library (Bell and Sons). <a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-39" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-40" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Pepys to Hewer, May 10th, 1682 (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Pepys’s Life, Journals, and Correspondence</i>, 1841, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 295). <a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-40" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-41" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Pepys's true friend, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Houblon, gave him the following letter of credit when he set out on the expedition:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
						<header>
							<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">“London, August 8, 1683.</p>
						</header>
						<p>“<span epub:type="z3998:recipient"><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Richard Gough</span>—This goes by my deare friend <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pepys, who is embarked on board the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Grafton</i> man-of-warr, commanded by our Lord Dartmouth, who is Admiral of the King’s Fleet for this Expedition. If <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pepys’s occasions draw him to Cadiz, you know what love and respect I bear him, so that I need not use arguments with you for to serve him there, which I am sure you will do to the utmost of your power. And wherein you find yourself deficient either for want of language or knowing the country, oblige your friends to help you, that he may have all the pleasure and divertisement there that Cales can afford him. And if his occasions require any money, you will furnish him what he desires, placing it to my account. I shall write you per next post concerning other matters. <span epub:type="z3998:valediction">I am, your loving friend,</span></p>
						<p class="signature" epub:type="z3998:sender">“James Houblon.”</p>
						<cite>Rawlinson <abbr>MSS.</abbr></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Pepys kept a journal of his proceedings at Tangier, which is now preserved among the Rawlinson <abbr>MSS.</abbr> in the Bodleian Library, Oxford. It was deciphered and published by the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> John Smith, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life, Journals, and Correspondence of Pepys</i>, 1841. <a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-41" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-42" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Birch’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of the Royal Society</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 23. <a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-42" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-43" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Diploma sent by the University of Oxford to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pepys,</p>
					<p>Upon his presenting the Portrait of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Wallis to their Picture Gallery, October, 1702.</p>
					<blockquote xml:lang="la">
						<p>“Ornatissimo, Optimoque, Viro <b>Samueli Pepys</b>, Armigero, Regibus Carolo Secundo et Jacobo Secundo a Secretis Admiralitæ, Universitas Oxoniensis.</p>
						<p>“Te de litteris optimè mereri (Vir ornatissime!) si non multis aliis, hoc uno argumento probari possit, quod litteratorum honori tam impensè faves: certe ante oculos gratissimum simul atque splendidissimum munificentiæ vestræ atque in nos benevolentiæ exemplum quotidie cum laude tuâ observabitur, neque in doctissimi Professoris imagine ipsam quasi depictam mathematicen, insolitamque animi vestri descriptam benignitatem satis unquam mirabimur. Et quidem præclaræ indolis est posse magnum Wallisium in pretio habere, qui nihil unquam vulgare aut sapuit aut fecit, tendit in altos multâ curâ litterarum tractus, sublimesque aperit mathematum vias, cœlis proximus quos metitur et sideribus stellisque quorum numerus ejus arithmeticæ patet, omnesque nisi Lynceum atque Aquilinum oculum fugit. Tu solertissimus tam cœlestis ingenii æstimator, dum tantum in alio meritum suspicis, et dum tam eximii, tam perspicacis in rebus abstrusissimis Viri similitudinem nobis proponis, egregiæ mentis tuæ erigis immortalitatem: non illius formæ atque titulis tantum, verum famæ etiam nomen tuum inscribis, et quantus sis non obscurè inde judicare possumus, quod talem Virum Genti nostras, et litterati Orbis tam grande ornamentum, in amicum tibi cooptasti; pulchrè similes unit amor, atque in eâdem tabula in secula juncti vivatis, utrique perpetuis nostris encomiis dignissimi, quorum alter Academiam exornat, alter ipsum ornantem. At non a solé istius tabulæ diuturnitate utriusque immortalitas æstimanda est. Ilium Motûs Leges et quicquid uspiam cœli terrarumque ab humanâ mente capi, quædam quæ a solâ Wallisianâ inveniri possunt non morituris descripta voluminibus omnium temporum admirationi consecravere; patet vero in laudes tuas ipse Oceanus, quern illâ tam bene instructâ classe contravisti, quæ et potentissimorum hostium, et voracissimorum fluctuum iras potuit contemnere. Tu felicioribus quam ullus unquam Dædalus armamentis naves tuas firmasti, ut navigantium non tantum gloriæ fuerint, vèrum etiam saluti. Tu certè Ligneis Muris Britanniam munivisti, et quod ad utrumque Polum (sive quiddam novi exploraturi, sive victoriam circumferentes) vela nostri explicare potuissent, sola tua cura effecit. Alii res arduas mari aggredi ausi sunt, tuum vero profundius ipso Oceano ingenium audaces reddidit; quod mirâ arte, sive passis velis sive contractis ageretur, excogitavit, ut id tuto poterant præstare. Aliorum virtuti forsan debemus, ut res magnæ agerentur, sed ut agi potuissent, propria gloria est industrisæ tuæ. Fruere ergo felix hâc parte laudis tuæ, quæ tamdiu duratura est, quamdiu erit in usu Pyxis nautica, aut cursus suos peragent Sidera: quam quideni (omissis aliis rebus a quibus immortali gloria viges) ideo tantum memoramus, ne sis nescius probè nos scire quanto a Viro benevolentia ista in nos conferatur, quam gratis animis amplectimur ut non plus debeant artes atque scientitæ Wallisio, neque Reges et Britannia tibi, quam ob hoc præclarum munus nos tibi obæratos læti sentimus, atque optamus ut hoc gratitudinis nostræ testimonium observatissimæ in te nostræ mentis viva imago parem cum vestrâ famâ perennitatis circulum describat, atque adeo sit æterna.</p>
						<p>“Datum in Domo Convocationis, Vicesimo tertio die Mensis Octobris, Anno Domini millesimo septingesimo secundo.</p>
						<p>“Sigillat: in Domo Convocationis, Vicesimo nono ejusdem Mensis Octobris Annoque Domini supradict.”</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-43" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-44" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Communicated to Lord Braybrooke by the late <abbr>Mr.</abbr> William Upcott. It appears, from the Evelyn Papers in the British Museum (bought at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Upcott’s sale), that in September, 1705, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> John Jackson made a proposal of marriage to one of Evelyn’s grand-daughters, through their common friend, William Hewer. The alliance was declined solely on account of Jackson’s being unable to make an adequate settlement on the young lady; whilst Evelyn (the draught of whose answer is preserved) courteously acknowledged the respect entertained by him for Pepys’s memory, and his sense of his nephew’s extraordinary accomplishments. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Jackson married Anne, daughter of the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> John Edgerley, Vicar of Wandsworth, Prebendary of <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul’s, and Archdeacon, by Anne, daughter of ⸻ Blackburn, William Hewer’s uncle, often mentioned in the Diary. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Jackson left two sons (at whose death, <abbr>s. p.</abbr>, the male line became extinct) and five daughters, the youngest of whom married John Cockerell, of Bishop’s Hall, Somerset, and the present representatives are the family of Pepys Cockerell. <a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-44" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-45" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>From the original in the Bodleian Library:</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“London, June 5. Yesterday, in the evening, were performed the obsequies of Samuel Pepys, <abbr>Esq.</abbr>, in Crutched-Friars’ Church; whither his corpse was brought in a very honourable and solemn manner from Clapham, where he departed this life the 26th day of the last month.”</p>
						<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Post Boy</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 1257, June 5, 1703.</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“June 4th, 1703. — Samuel Peyps, Esq<sup>re</sup>, buried in a vault by y<sup>e</sup> Com̃union Table.”</p>
						<cite>Register of <abbr>St.</abbr> Olave’s, Hart Street</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-45" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-46" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>See Ellis’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Early English Pronunciation</i>, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 1230-1243. <a href="../text/introduction.xhtml#noteref-46" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-47" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The year did not legally begin in England before the 25th March until the act for altering the style fixed the 1st of January as the first day of the year, and previous to 1752 the year extended from March 25th to the following March 24th. Thus since 1752 we have been in the habit of putting the two dates for the months of January and February and March 1 to 24⁠—in all years previous to 1752. Practically, however, many persons considered the year to commence with January 1st, as it will be seen Pepys did. The 1st of January was considered as New Year’s day long before Pepys’s time. The fiscal year has not been altered; and the national accounts are still reckoned from old Lady Day, which falls on the 6th of April. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-47" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-48" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Pepys was successfully cut for the stone on March 26th, 1658. See March 26th below. Although not suffering from this cause again until the end of his life, there are frequent references in the Diary to pain whenever he caught cold. In a letter from Pepys to his nephew Jackson, April 8th, 1700, there is a reference to the breaking out three years before his death of the wound caused by the cutting for the stone: “It has been my calamity for much the greatest part of this time to have been kept bedrid, under an evil so rarely known as to have had it matter of universal surprise and with little less general opinion of its dangerousness; namely, that the cicatrice of a wound occasioned upon my cutting for the stone, without hearing anything of it in all this time, should after more than 40 years’ perfect cure, break out again.” At the postmortem examination a nest of seven stones, weighing four and a half ounces, was found in the left kidney, which was entirely ulcerated. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-48" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-49" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Pepys’s house was on the south side of King Street, Westminster; it is singular that when he removed to a residence in the city, he should have settled close to another Axe Yard. Fludyer Street stands on the site of Axe Yard, which derived its name from a great messuage or brewhouse on the west side of King Street, called “The Axe,” and referred to in a document of the 23rd of Henry <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-49" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-50" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Ed.</abbr> note: … are used to denote censored passages <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-50" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-51" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Lambert, major-general in the Parliamentary army. The title Lord was not his by right, but it was frequently given to the republican officers. He was born in 1619, at Calton Hall, in the parish of Kirkby-in-Malham-Dale, in the West Riding of Yorkshire. In 1642 he was appointed captain of horse under Fairfax, and acted as major-general to Cromwell in 1650 during the war in Scotland. After this Parliament conferred on him a grant of lands in Scotland worth £1,000 per annum. He refused to take the oath of allegiance to Cromwell, for which the Protector deprived him of his commission. After Cromwell’s death he tried to set up a military government. The Commons cashiered Lambert, Desborough, and other officers, October 12th, 1659, but Lambert retaliated by thrusting out the Commons, and set out to meet Monk. His men fell away from him, and he was sent to the Tower, March 3rd, 1660, but escaped. In 1662 he was tried on a charge of high treason and condemned, but his life was spared. It is generally stated that he passed the remainder of his life in the island of Guernsey, but this is proved to be incorrect by a <abbr>MS.</abbr> in the Plymouth Athenaeum, entitled “Plimmouth Memoirs collected by James Yonge, 1684” This will be seen from the following extracts quoted by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">R. J.</abbr> King, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Notes and Queries</i>, “1667 Lambert the arch-rebel brought to this island [<abbr>St.</abbr> Nicholas, at the entrance of Plymouth harbour].” “1683 Easter day Lambert that olde rebell dyed this winter on Plimmouth Island where he had been prisoner 15 years and more.” <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-51" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-52" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir John Lawson, the son of a poor man at Hull, entered the navy as a common sailor, rose to the rank of admiral, and distinguished himself during the Protectorate. Though a republican, he readily closed with the design of restoring the King. He was vice-admiral under the Earl of Sandwich, and commanded the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">London</i> in the squadron which conveyed Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> to England. He was mortally wounded in the action with the Dutch off Harwich, June, 1665. He must not be confounded with another John Lawson, the Royalist, of Brough Hall, in Yorkshire, who was created a Baronet by Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, July 6th, 1665. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-52" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-53" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>George Monk, born 1608, created Duke of Albemarle, 1660, married Ann Clarges, March, 1654, died January 3rd, 1676. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-53" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-54" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“The City sent and invited him [Monk] to dine the next day at Guildhall, and there he declared for the members whom the army had forced away in year forty-seven and forty-eight, who were known by the names of secluded members.”</p>
						<cite>Burnet’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>Hist.</abbr> of his Own Time</i>, book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-54" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-55" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>George Downing was one of the Four Tellers of the Receipt of the Exchequer, and in his office Pepys was a clerk. He was the son of Emmanuel Downing of the Inner Temple, afterwards of Salem, Massachusetts, and of Lucy, sister of Governor John Winthrop. He is supposed to have been born in August, 1623. He and his parents went to New England in 1638, and he was the second graduate of Harvard College. He returned to England about 1645, and acted as Colonel Okey’s chaplain before he entered into political life. Anthony a Wood (who incorrectly describes him as the son of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Calybute Downing, vicar of Hackney) calls Downing a sider with all times and changes: skilled in the common cant, and a preacher occasionally. He was sent by Cromwell to Holland in 1657, as resident there. At the Restoration, he espoused the King’s cause, and was knighted and elected M.P. for Morpeth, in 1661. Afterwards, becoming Secretary to the Treasury and Commissioner of the Customs, he was in 1663 created a Baronet of East Hatley, in Cambridgeshire, and was again sent Ambassador to Holland. His grandson of the same name, who died in 1749, was the founder of Downing College, Cambridge. The title became extinct in 1764, upon the decease of Sir John Gerrard Downing, the last heir-male of the family. Sir George Downing’s character will be found in Lord Clarendon’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 4. Pepys’s opinion seems to be somewhat of a mixed kind. He died in July, 1684. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-55" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-56" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Peter Gunning, afterwards Master of <abbr>St.</abbr> John’s College, Cambridge, and successively Bishop of Chichester and Ely. He had continued to read the Liturgy at the chapel at Exeter House when the Parliament was most predominant, for which Cromwell often rebuked him. Evelyn relates that on Christmas Day, 1657, the chapel was surrounded with soldiers, and the congregation taken prisoners, he and his wife being among them. There are several notices of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Gunning in Evelyn’s Diary. When he obtained the mastership of <abbr>St.</abbr> John’s College upon the ejection of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Tuckney, he allowed that Nonconformist divine a handsome annuity during his life. He was a great controversialist, and a man of great reading. Burnet says he “was a very honest sincere man, but of no sound judgment, and of no prudence in affairs” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>Hist.</abbr> of his Own Time</i>). He died July 6th, 1684, aged seventy-one. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-56" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-57" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Exeter House, which stood on the north side of the Strand, to the east of Bedford House, was built by Sir William Cecil, Lord Burghley, whose eldest son was created first Earl of Exeter. It was also known as Cecil and Burleigh House. Exeter Street and Burleigh Street mark the site of the house. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-57" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-58" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The conduit was situated near the north end of Salisbury Square. Monk’s lodgings were close by. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-58" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-59" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Theophila Turner, daughter of Sergeant John and Jane Turner, who married Sir Arthur Harris, Bart. She died 1686. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-59" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-60" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Shepley was a servant of Admiral Sir Edward Montagu (afterwards Earl of Sandwich), with whom Pepys was frequently brought in contact. He was steward at Hinchinbroke. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-60" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-61" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir Edward Montagu, born 1625, son of Sir Sidney Montagu, by Paulina, daughter of John Pepys of Cottenham, married Jemima, daughter of John Crew of Stene. He died in action against the Dutch in Southwold Bay, May 28th, 1672. The title of “My Lord” here applied to Montagu before he was created Earl of Sandwich is of the same character as that given to General Lambert. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-61" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-62" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Crew, born 1598, eldest son of Sir Thomas Crew, Sergeant-at-Law and Speaker of the House of Commons. He sat for Brackley in the Long Parliament. Created Baron Crew of Stene, in the county of Northampton, at the coronation of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. He married Jemima, daughter and co-heir of Edward Walgrave (or Waldegrave) of Lawford, Essex. His house was in Lincoln’s Inn Fields. He died December 12th, 1679. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-62" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-63" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Thomas, Lord Fairfax, Generalissimo of the Parliament forces. After the Restoration, he retired to his country seat, where he lived in private till his death, 1671. In a volume (autograph) of Lord Fairfax’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Poems</i>, preserved in the British Museum, 11744, <abbr>f.</abbr> 42, the following lines occur upon the 30th of January, on which day the King was beheaded. It is believed that they have never been printed.</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<span>“O let that day from time be bloted quitt,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And beleef of ’t in next age be waved,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>In depest silence that act concealed might,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">That so the creadet of our nation might be saved;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>But if the powre devine hath ordered this,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>His will’s the law, and our must aquiess.”</span>
					</blockquote>
					<p>These wretched verses have obviously no merit; but they are curious as showing that Fairfax, who had refused to act as one of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>’s judges; continued long afterwards to entertain a proper horror for that unfortunate monarch’s fate. It has recently been pointed out to me, that the lines were not originally composed by Fairfax, being only a poor translation of the spirited lines of Statius (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sylvarum</i> <abbr>lib.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> <abbr>cap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> <abbr>l.</abbr> 88):</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse" xml:lang="la">
						<span>“Excidat illa dies ævo, ne postera credant</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Secula, nos certè taceamus; et obruta multâ</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nocte tegi propria patiamur crimina gentis.”</span>
					</blockquote>
					<p>These verses were first applied by the President de Thou to the massacre of <abbr>St.</abbr> Bartholomew, 1572; and in our day, by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pitt, in his memorable speech in the House of Commons, January, 1793, after the murder of Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span>⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-63" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-64" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This gentleman was a connection of Sir Edward Montagu’s, whose daughter Jemima he wanted to marry, but he was not received with favour by her (see January 17th, 1659–60). <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-64" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-65" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Clare Market, named after John Holies, Earl of Clare, was at first known as New Market. John Willis’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Mnemonica, or the Art of Memory</i>, was published in 1661, by “Leonard Sowerby at the Turnstile near New Market in Lincoln’s Inn Fields.” <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-65" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-66" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jemimah, or <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jem, was Jemima, eldest daughter of Sir Edward Montagu. At this time she and her sister, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ann, seem to have been living alone with their maids in London, and Pepys’s duty was to look after them. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-66" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-67" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Pepys does not appear to have made any progress in learning the game, for on May 15th he writes that he cannot play it. “The game at cribbidge” is described in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Complete Gamester</i>, 1677, and subsequent editions. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-67" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-68" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Pepys constantly visited “Will’s” about this time; but this could not be the famous coffeehouse in Covent Garden, because he mentions visiting there for the first time, February 3rd, 1663⁠–⁠64. It was most probably the house of William Joyce, who kept a place of entertainment at Westminster (see <abbr>Jan.</abbr> 29th). <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-68" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-69" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Jemima, wife of Sir Edward Montagu, daughter of John Crew of Stene, afterwards Lord Crew. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-69" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-70" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Jane, daughter of John Pepys of South Creake, Norfolk, married to John Turner, Sergeant-at-law, Recorder of York; their only child, Theophila, frequently mentioned as <abbr class="name">The.</abbr> or <abbr class="name">Theoph.</abbr>, became the wife of Sir Arthur Harris, <abbr>Bart.</abbr>, of Stowford, Devon, and died 1686, <abbr>s.p.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-70" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-71" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Vanley appears to have been Pepys’s landlord; he is mentioned again in the Diary on September 20th, 1660. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-71" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-72" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Pepys visited several Swan taverns, so that it is impossible to say which one is here referred to. It might have been either the one in the Palace Yard or the one in King Street, Westminster. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-72" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-73" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>It was not usual at this time to sit down to breakfast, but instead a morning draught was taken at a tavern. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-73" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-74" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The rising of the Fifth Monarchy men is described later on. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-74" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-75" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Hinchinbroke was Sir Edward Montagu’s seat, from which he afterwards took his second title. Hinchinbroke House, so often mentioned in the Diary, stood about half a mile to the westward of the town of Huntingdon. It was erected late in the reign of Elizabeth, by Sir Henry Cromwell, on the site of a Benedictine nunnery, granted at the Dissolution, with all its appurtenances, to his father, Richard Williams, who had assumed the name of Cromwell, and whose grandson, Sir Oliver, was the uncle and godfather of the Protector. The knight, who was renowned for, his hospitality, had the honour of entertaining King James at Hinchinbroke, but, getting into pecuniary difficulties, was obliged to sell his estates, which were conveyed, July 28th, 1627, to Sir Sidney Montagu of Barnwell, father of the first Earl of Sandwich, in whose descendant they are still vested. On the morning of the 22nd January, 1830, during the minority of the seventh Earl, Hinchinbroke was almost entirely destroyed by fire, but the pictures and furniture were mostly saved, and the house has been rebuilt in the Elizabethan style, and the interior greatly improved, under the direction of Edward Blore, <abbr>Esq.</abbr>, <abbr>R.A.</abbr>⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-75" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-76" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Dick Spicer, afterwards a brother clerk with Pepys of the Privy Seal. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-76" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-77" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Dick Vines. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-77" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-78" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>George Vines. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-78" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-79" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>It was usual to have a “chest of viols,” which consisted of six, <abbr>viz.</abbr>, two trebles, two tenors, and two basses (see note in North’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoirs of Musick</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Rimbault, <abbr>p.</abbr> 70). The bass viol was also called the <i xml:lang="la">viola da gamba</i>, because it was held between the legs. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-79" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-80" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Later on (January 9th) it is said that Bradshaw’s lodgings were being prepared for Monk. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-80" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-81" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Edward Montagu, son of Sir Edward, and afterwards Lord Hinchinbroke. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-81" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-82" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Thomas Pepys, probably the son of Thomas Pepys of London (born, 1595), brother of Samuel’s father, John Pepys. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-82" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-83" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Pepys was born in 1641, and his brother Samuel took great interest in his welfare, but he did not do any great credit to his elder. He took orders in 1666, and in 1670 was, through the influence of his brother Samuel, appointed Clerk to the Trinity House. In 1674 he was appointed joint Clerk of the Acts with Thomas Hayter. He died in March, 1676–77, leaving some debts which Samuel paid. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-83" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-84" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Elizabeth, daughter of Richard Pepys, Lord Chief Justice of Ireland, and wife of Thomas Stradwick. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-84" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-85" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>George Vines and Dick Vines. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-85" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-86" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Scott was husband of Judith, another daughter of Chief Justice Richard Pepys. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-86" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-87" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Paulina, sister of Samuel, who was born 1640, and married John Jackson of Brampton, <abbr>co.</abbr> Hunts. She had two sons, Samuel and John, the second being heir to his uncle Samuel. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-87" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-88" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This was probably Joyce Norton, who was cousin to the Turners as well as to Pepys. She was the daughter of Richard Norton of South Creake and his wife, Barbara Pepys. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-88" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-89" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Antoine de Neuville, Seigneur de Bordeaux. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-89" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-90" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Probably Hugh May, who after 1662 was established as an architect. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-90" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-91" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Harding was one of the Gentlemen of the King’s Private Music in 1674. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-91" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-92" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Emblems, Divine and Moral</i> of Francis Quarles was first published in 1635. There is no copy of this book now in the Pepysian Library. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-92" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-93" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bell; she died of the plague. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-93" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-94" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Robert Mossum, author of several sermons preached in London, and printed about the time of the Restoration, who was in 1666 made Bishop of Derry. In the title-page of his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">Apology in behalf of the Sequestered Clergy</i>, printed in 1660, he calls himself “Preacher of God’s word at <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter’s, Paul’s Wharf, London,” and at the end, “one of the sequestered clergy.” This pamphlet is reprinted in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Somers Tracts</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 237, <abbr>edit.</abbr> 1812. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-94" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-95" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Declamations at <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul’s School, in which there were opponents and respondents. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-95" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-96" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>William Simons. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-96" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-97" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Henry Scobell was Clerk to the House of Commons. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-97" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-98" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Henry Elsynge, born at Battersea, appointed Clerk of the House of Commons through the influence of Archbishop Laud, resigned in 1648 to avoid taking part in the proceedings against Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. He retired to Hounslow, where he died 1654. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-98" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-99" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Miles’s Coffee House in Old Palace Yard, where was held the Rota Club, founded by James Harrington, which is referred to again further on. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-99" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-100" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Bradshaw (born 1586), President of the Council of State, died at the Deanery, Westminster, on October 31st, 1659. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-100" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-101" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir Harry Vane the younger, an inflexible republican. He was executed in 1662, on a charge of conspiring the death of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-101" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-102" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Raby Castle in Durham, now the seat of Sir Harry Vane’s descendant, the Duke of Cleveland. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-102" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-103" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Jennings is mentioned again August 8th, 1660. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-103" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-104" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Ralph Greatorex, the well-known mathematical instrument maker of his day. He is frequently mentioned by Pepys. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-104" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-105" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>There are two tokens of the Star Tavern in Cheapside, one dated 1648 and the other 1652 (see <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Boyne’s Trade Tokens</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Williamson, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 1889, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 562, 563). <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-105" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-106" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Captain Okeshott is not mentioned again in the Diary. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-106" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-107" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>James Harrington, the political writer, born January, 1611, author of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Oceana</i>, and founder of a club called The Rota, in 1659, which met at Miles’s coffee-house in Old Palace Yard, and lasted only a few months. He attended Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> on the scaffold. In 1661 he was sent to the Tower, on suspicion of treasonable designs, and was removed from thence to <abbr>St.</abbr> Nicholas Island, near Plymouth, but his intellect having failed his friends obtained his discharge on giving security for his behaviour. He died September 11th, 1667. Henry Nevill and Harrington “had every night a meeting at the (then) Turke’s Head, in the New Palace Yard, where they take water, the next house to the Staires, at one Miles’s, where was made purposely a large oval table, with a passage in the middle, for Miles to deliver his coffee. About it sate his disciples and the virtuosi.”—Aubrey’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bodleian Letters</i> 1813, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> <abbr>pt.</abbr> 2, <abbr>p.</abbr> 371. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-107" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-108" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir William Poultny, or Pulteney, subsequently <abbr>M.P.</abbr> for Westminster, and a Commissioner of the Privy Seal under King William. Died 1671. Grandfather to William Earl of Bath. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-108" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-109" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Edward Gold, the merchant. His name occurs among the Governors of Sir Roger Cholmley’s school at Highgate. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-109" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-110" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>William Petty, <abbr>M.D.</abbr>, an eminent physician and the founder of Political Economy (or Political Arithmetic, as he called it), bom May i6th, 1623. He was elected Professor of Music at Gresham College by the interest of Captain John Graunt. Knighted in 1661. He died December 16th, 1687. His widow was created Baroness Shelburne in the Peerage of Ireland, and their eldest son succeeded to the title. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-110" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-111" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Thomas Doling. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-111" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-112" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Thomas Scott, <abbr>M.P.</abbr>, was made Secretary of State to the Commonwealth on the 17th of this same January. He signed the death warrant of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, for which he was executed at Charing Cross, October 16th, 1660. He gloried in his offence, and desired to have written on his tombstone, “Thomas Scott who adjudged to death the late king.” <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-112" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-113" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Thomas Pepys, Samuel’s brother, born 1634 and died 1664. He carried on his father's business as a tailor. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-113" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-114" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The game of battledore and shuttlecock was formerly much played even in tennis courts, and was a very violent game. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-114" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-115" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Edward Walgrave, or Waldegrave, of Lawford, Essex, father of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Crew. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-115" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-116" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Captain Philip Holland, at one time captain of <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Assurance</i> (see December 11th, 1660); he renewed his commission on June 3rd, 1660. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-116" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-117" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Swan tavern in Fenchurch Street. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-117" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-118" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir Arthur Haselrigge, <abbr>Bart.</abbr>, of Nosely, <abbr>co.</abbr> Leicester, and <abbr>M.P.</abbr> for that county. He brought forward the Bill in the House of Commons for the attainder of the Earl of Strafford, and he was one of the five members charged with high treason by Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> in 1642. Colonel of a regiment in the Parliament army, and much esteemed by Cromwell. In March, 1659–60, he was committed to the Tower by Monk, where he died, January, 1660–61. Although one of the King's judges, he did not sign the death-warrant. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-118" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-119" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Colonel Morley, one of the Council of State, Lieutenant of the Tower. John Evelyn attempted to bring him over to the King’s side, but he hesitated, and lost the honour of restoring the King. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-119" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-120" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Lord Mayor was Thomas Allen, created a baronet at the Restoration. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-120" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-121" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Leonard Pinckney was one of the four Tellers of the Receipt of the Exchequer, and he acted as Clerk of the Kitchen at Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>’s Coronation feast. His son, William Pinckney, was admitted into his place of Teller in 1661. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-121" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-122" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Catan Stirpin, a girl who afterwards married a Monsieur Petit (see October 23rd, 1660). She is called Kate Sterpin on March 6th, 1659–60. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-122" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-123" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir Anthony Ashley Cooper was born July 22nd, 1621, and received his early instruction from Puritan private tutors. He was admitted into the Society of Lincoln’s Inn, February 18th, 1638, and was elected Member of Parliament for Tewkesbury in 1640. For a time he favoured the royal cause, but soon transferred his services to the Commonwealth. He had taken his seat for Downton on the 7th of this January. He was created Baron Ashley in 1661, and Earl of Shaftesbury in 1672. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-123" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-124" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>“Baronius informs us that Pope John <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span> in 968 consecrated a very large new cast bell in the Lateran Church, and gave it the name of John. This is the first instance I meet with of what has been since called ‘The baptizing of bells,’ a superstition which the reader may find ridiculed in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Beehive of the Romish Church</i>, 1579.” A list of the ceremonies is quoted, and instance given of the practice in 14 <abbr>Hen.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, when Sir WilHam Symys, Richard Clech, and Maistres Smyth were godfathers and godmother to a bell at Reading. See Brand’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Popular Antiquities</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Hazlitt, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 239-240. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-124" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-125" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>There is a token of the Green Dragon on Lambeth Hill, dated 1651 (see <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Boyne’s Trade Tokens</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Williamson, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 1889, <abbr>p.</abbr> 650). <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-125" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-126" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The flageolet is a small flute à bec. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-126" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-127" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Philip Stanhope, second Earl of Chesterfield, <abbr>ob.</abbr> 1713, <i xml:lang="la"><abbr>æt.</abbr> suæ</i> 80. We learn, from the memoir prefixed to his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Printed Correspondence</i>, that he fought three duels, disarming and wounding his first and second antagonists, and killing the third. The name of the unfortunate gentleman who fell on this occasion was Woolly. Lord Chesterfield, absconding, went to Breda, where he obtained the royal pardon from Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. He acted a busy part in the eventful times in which he lived, and was remarkable for his steady adherence to the Stuarts. Lord Chesterfield’s letter to Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, and the King’s answer granting the royal pardon, occur in the Correspondence published by General Sir John Murray, in 1829.</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“<abbr>Jan.</abbr> 17th, 1659. The Earl of Chesterfield and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Woolly’s son of Hammersmith, had a quarrel about a mare of eighteen pounds price; the quarrel would not be reconciled, insomuch that a challenge passed between them. They fought a duel on the backside of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Colby’s house at Kensington, where the Earl and he had several passes. The Earl wounded him in two places, and would fain have then ended, but the stubbornness and pride of heart of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Woolly would not give over, and the next pass [he] was killed on the spot. The Earl fled to Chelsea, and there took water and escaped. The jury found it chance-medley.”</p>
						<cite>Rugge’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diurnal</i>, Addit <abbr>MSS.</abbr>, British Museum.</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-127" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-128" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>William Fuller, of Magdalen Hall, Oxford, was a schoolmaster at Twickenham during the Rebellion, and at the Restoration became Dean of <abbr>St.</abbr> Patrick’s, and, in 1663, Bishop of Limerick, from which see, in 1667, he was translated to Lincoln. He died April 23rd, 1675. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-128" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-129" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Washington the purser, see July 2nd, 1660. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-129" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-130" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Colonel William Sydenham had been an active officer during the Civil Wars, on the Parliament side; <abbr>M.P.</abbr> for Dorsetshire, Governor of Melcombe, and one of the Committee of Safety. He was the elder brother of the celebrated physician of that name.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-130" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-131" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>In the Journals of that date, Major Richard Salwey. Colonel Salway is mentioned as a prisoner in the Tower, 1663–4, in Bayley’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of the Tower of London</i>, 1830, <abbr>p.</abbr> 590. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-131" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-132" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Richard Cromwell, third son of Oliver Cromwell, born October 4th, 1626, admitted a member of Lincoln’s Inn, May 27th, 1647, fell into debt and devoted himself to hunting and field sports. His succession to his father as Protector was universally accepted at first, but the army soon began to murmur because he was not a general. Between the dissensions of various parties he fell, and the country was left in a state of anarchy: He went abroad early in the summer of 1660, and lived abroad for some years, returning to England in 1680. After his fall he bore the name of John Clarke. Died at Cheshunt, July 12th, 1712. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-132" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-133" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Fleetwood and Desborough played a double game. John Desborough, born 1608, second son of James Disbrowe, married, 1636, Jane, sister to Oliver Cromwell; Major-General, 1648. Charles Fleetwood, son of Sir William Fleetwood, Cup-bearer to James <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> and Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>; Lord Deputy of Ireland (for a time being succeeded by Henry Cromwell), became Cromwell’s son-in-law by his marriage with Ireton’s widow, and a member of the Council of State. He seemed disposed to have espoused Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>’s interests, but had not resolution enough to execute his design. At the Restoration, he was excepted out of the Act of Indemnity, and spent the remainder of his life in retirement at Stoke Newington. He died 1692. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-133" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-134" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wilkinson was landlord of the Crown in King Street, Westminster. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-134" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-135" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Butler is usually styled by Pepys <span xml:lang="fr"><abbr>Mons.</abbr> l’Impertinent</span>. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-135" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-136" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Probably <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> (afterwards Lady) Anne Montagu, daughter of Sir Edward Montagu, and sister to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jem. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-136" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-137" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The making of ciphers was a popular amusement about this time. Pepys made several for Montagu, Downing, and others. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-137" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-138" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This salary appears to have been £50 a year. See 30th of this month. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-138" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-139" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Pepys had two friends named Pierce, one the surgeon and the other the purser; he usually (but not always) distinguishes them. The one here alluded to was probably the surgeon, and husband of pretty <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Pierce. After the Restoration James Pearse or Pierce became Surgeon to the Duke of York, and he was also Surgeon-General of the Fleet. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-139" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-140" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Nieuport, who is described by Evelyn as “a judicious, crafty, and wise man.” <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-140" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-141" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir Thomas Widdrington was admitted a member of Gray’s Inn in 1618. As Recorder of Berwick he addressed a loyal speech to Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> in 1633, when he expressed the wish that his throne might be “established before the Lord for ever.” He afterwards distinguished himself as a zealous Presbyterian, and in 1648 he was appointed a Commissioner of the Great Seal. When the trial of the King was arranged, he and his fellow Commissioner (Whitelocke) kept out of the way, so that they should have nothing to do with that criminal proceeding. Having declined to serve further as Commissioner, he was made Sergeant for the Commonwealth in 1650, and member of the Council of State in 1651. In 1654 he was again appointed Commissioner of the Great Seal, but was dismissed in 1655. He was elected in 1656 for York and for Northumberland, and chose to sit for the county. He was Speaker of this Parliament, which was dissolved in 1658. He was appointed Lord Chief Baron, but soon after was transferred to his former office of Commissioner of the Great Seal. He had the benefit of the Act of Indemnity at the Restoration, and was the first named of the re-appointed sergeants. He died May 13th, 1664, and was buried in the chancel of the church of St. Giles’s-in-the-Fields. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-141" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-142" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Swan in Old Fish Street was an old tavern, as it is mentioned in 1413 as the Swan on the Hoop, at the south-east comer of old Fish Street and Bread Street. There is a token of the house. (See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Boyne’s Trade Tokens</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Williamson, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 1889, <abbr>p.</abbr> 691.) <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-142" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-143" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Falconberge (or Falconbridge, as sometimes spelt) appears to have beena clerk in the Exchequer. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Barker, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Pepys’s woman, was previously in the service of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Falconberge. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-143" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-144" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Betty Lane, a haberdasher or seamstress who occupied a stall in the Hall. She is frequently mentioned in the Diary. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-144" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-145" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>These stationers and booksellers, whose shops disfigured Westminster Hall down to a late period, were a privileged class. In the statutes for appointing licensers and regulating the press, there is a clause exempting them from the pains and penalties of these obnoxious laws. The exception in the 14 <abbr>Car.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <abbr>cap.</abbr> 33, <abbr>sec.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span>, runs thus: “Provided alsoe… that neither this act, nor any therein contained, shall be construed to prohibit any person or persons to sell books or papers who have sold books or papers within Westminster Hall, the Palace of Westminster, or in any shopp or shopps within twenty yards of the Great Gate of Westminster Hall aforesaid before the said 20th November, 1661, but they and every of them may sell books and papers as they have or did before the said 20th November, 1661, within the said Hall, Pallace, and twenty yards aforesaid, and not elsewhere, anything in this act to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.” <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-145" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-146" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
							<p>“<abbr>Jan.</abbr> 20th. Then there went out of the City, by desire of the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen, Alderman Fowke and Alderman Vincett, alias Vincent, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Broomfield, to compliment General Monk, who lay at Harborough Town, in Leicestershire.”</p>
						</article>
						<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
							<p>“<abbr>Jan.</abbr> 21st. Because the Speaker was sick, and Lord General Monk so near London, and everybody thought that the City would suffer for their affronts to the soldiery, and because they had sent the sword- bearer to, the General without the Parliament’s consent, and the three Aldermen were gone to give him the welcome to town, these four lines were in almost everybody’s mouth:</p>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<span>“Monk under a hood, not well understood,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i1">The City pull in their horns;</span>
								<br/>
								<span>The Speaker is out, and sick of the gout,</span>
								<br/>
								<span class="i1">And the Parliament sit upon thorns.”</span>
							</blockquote>
						</article>
						<cite>Rugge’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diurnal</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-146" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-147" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Mitre in Fleet Street was opposite <abbr>St.</abbr> Dunstan’s Church, and stood on the site of part of <abbr>Messrs.</abbr> Hoare’s banking house. It is said to have dated back to Shakespeare’s day. There is a token of “<abbr>Will.</abbr> Pagget at the Miter in Fleet Street.” Pagget appears to have succeeded John Bayly, who died January, 1648–9. Mitre Tavern, Mitre Court, is another tavern. (See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Boyne’s Trade Tokens</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Williamson, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 1889, <abbr>p.</abbr> 604.) <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-147" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-148" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>William Lenthall, born June, 1591, called to the bar at Lincoln’s Inn in 1616. He was chosen Speaker of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>’s second parliament of 1640, but was forced to vacate his chair by Cromwell’s forcible expulsion of the members from the House, 1653. He retired to the Rolls, having been sworn in Master of the Rolls in 1643. He was chosen Speaker of Cromwell’s second parliament in 1654. Cromwell made him one of his Lords, but when the Long Parliament resumed its sittings, he was induced again to take his seat as Speaker. He was three times Keeper of the Great Seal for short periods of time. After the Restoration he was in fear for his safety, but eventually he obtained the royal pardon, and died September 3rd, 1662. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-148" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-149" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Robert Mossum (afterwards Bishop of Derry). See ante, January 8th, 1659–60. His name is sometimes written Mossum and sometimes Messum in the Diary. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-149" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-150" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Ralph Widdrington, Lady Margaret’s Professor and Public Orator, having been ejected from his fellowship by the Master and Fellows of Christ’s College, Cambridge, October 28th, 1661, sued out a mandamus to be restored to it; and the matter being referred to commissioners—“The Bishop of London, the Lord Chancellor, and some of the judges”—he obtained restitution.—Kennett’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Register</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 552. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-150" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-151" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Herring, a Presbyterian minister, who was afterwards ejected from <abbr>St.</abbr> Bride’s, Fleet Street. His farewell sermon is described in the Diary under date August 17th, 1662. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-151" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-152" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Probably the Axe on the west side of King Street, Westminster, from the predecessor of which tavern Axe Yard, where Pepys lived, took its name. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-152" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-153" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Anne, daughter of John, first Lord Crew, married to Sir Harry Wright, <abbr>Bart.</abbr>, <abbr>M.P.</abbr> She was sister to Lady Montagu. Lived till 1708. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-153" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-154" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Michell, to whose shop in the Hall Pepys was a frequent visitor. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-154" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-155" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Stone Gallery was a long passage between the Privy Garden and the river. It led from the Bowling Green to the Court of the Palace. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-155" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-156" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The scramble for ribbons, here mentioned by Pepys in connection with weddings (see also January 26th, 1660⁠–⁠61, and February 8th, 1662⁠–⁠3), doubtless formed part of the ceremony of undressing the bridegroom, which, as the age became more refined, fell into disuse. All the old plays are silent on the custom; the earliest notice of which occurs in the old ballad of the wedding of Arthur O’Bradley, printed in the Appendix to <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Robin Hood</i>, 1795, where we read⁠—</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<span>“Then got they <em>his points and his garters,</em></span>
						<br/>
						<span>
							<em>And cut them in pieces like martyrs;</em>
						</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And then they all did play</span>
						<br/>
						<span>For the honour of Arthur O’Bradley.”</span>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Sir Winston Churchill also observes (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Divi Britannici</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 340) that James <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> was no more troubled at his querulous countrymen robbing him than a bridegroom at the losing of his points and garters. Lady Fanshawe, in her “Memoirs,” says, that at the nuptials of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> and the Infanta, “the Bishop of London declared them married in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; and then they caused the ribbons her Majesty wore to be cut in little pieces; and as far as they would go, everyone had some.” The practice still survives in the form of wedding favours.</p>
					<p>A similar custom is still of every day’s occurrence at Dieppe. Upon the morrow after their marriage, the bride and bridegroom perambulate the streets, followed by a numerous cortege, the guests at the wedding festival, two and two; each individual wearing two bits of narrow ribbon, about two inches in length, of different colours, which are pinned crossways upon the breast. These morsels of ribbons originally formed the garters of the bride and bridegroom, which had been divided amidst boisterous mirth among the assembled company, the moment the happy pair had been formally installed in the bridal bed.⁠—<abbr>Ex. inf.</abbr> <abbr>Mr.</abbr> William Hughes, Belvedere, Jersey.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-156" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-157" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Robert Blackburne was Secretary to the Admiralty, with a salary of £250 a year, until the appointment of the Duke of York as Lord High Admiral in July, 1660. James Southerne, his clerk (afterwards clerk to Sir William Coventry), was Clerk of the Acts from 1677 till 1690, when he was appointed Secretary to the Admiralty. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-157" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-158" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Lieutenant Lambert was appointed captain of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Norwich</i> in June, 1661. His death is mentioned by Pepys under date September 14th, 1665. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-158" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-159" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Samuel Cromleholme (or Crumlum), born in Wiltshire in 1618; Surmaster of <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul’s School, 1647; Head Master in 1657. He was a good scholar, and lost a valuable library when the school was burnt in the Great Fire. Died July 21st, 1672. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-159" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-160" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Tom Pepys the turner was son of Thomas Pepys, the elder brother of Samuel’s father. He had a shop in Bartholomew Fair in 1667. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-160" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-161" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Pepys’s uncle and aunt Wight are frequently mentioned in the Diary. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-161" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-162" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Hewson, who, from a low origin, became a colonel in the Parliament army, and sat in judgment on the King: he escaped hanging by flight, and died in 1662, at Amsterdam. A curious notice of Hewson occurs in Rugge’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diurnal</i>, December 5th, 1659, which states that “he was a cobbler by trade, but a very stout man, and a very good commander; but in regard of his former employment, they [the city apprentices] threw at him old shoes, and slippers, and turniptops, and brickbats, stones, and tiles.” … “At this time [January, 1659⁠–⁠60] there came forth, almost every day, jeering books: one was called <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Colonel Hewson’s Confession; or, a Parley with Pluto</i>, about his going into London, and taking down the gates of Temple-Bar.” He had but one eye, which did not escape the notice of his enemies.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-162" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-163" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Johannis Buxtorfii Thesaurus Grammaticus Linguæ Sanctæ Hebrææ</i>, 1651, is in the Pepysian Library. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-163" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-164" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>“Address to the King by his loyal subjects of the County of Northampton, 20 June, 1660.” Declarations came in from the nobility, knights, and gentry of the several counties, and most of these Declarations appeared before this one from Northampton. These broadsides are in the Library of the British Museum. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-164" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-165" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Thomas Crew, afterwards knighted, eldest son of John, afterwards Lord Crew, whom he succeeded in that title as second Lord. He died 1697. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-165" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-166" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>William Jessop was Clerk of the Council under the Commonwealth, and Secretary to the Commissioners of Parliament for Accounts. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-166" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-167" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Fenner lived in Old Bailey. Pepys’s aunt Fenner died August 19th 1661, after twenty-eight years of married life, and his uncle married again in January, 1661–62; see January 19th. Uncle Fenner himself died May 24th, 1664. Their daughter Kate married Anthony Joyce. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-167" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-168" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Robert Pepys of Brampton, whose will was proved August 23rd, 1661, uncle of Samuel. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-168" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-169" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Ellenor Pepys (baptized 1598) married George Becke of Lolworth, <abbr>co.</abbr> Cambridge. This cousin was probably one of their children. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-169" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-170" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Crown was in Palace Yard. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-170" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-171" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>George Montagu, fifth son of Henry, first Earl of Manchester, afterwards <abbr>M.P.</abbr> for Dover, and father of the first Earl of Halifax. He was youngest brother of Lord Manchester. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-171" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-172" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sherwin was afterwards Clerk to the Tangier Committee, see January 17th, 1664–65. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-172" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-173" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A place of entertainment within or adjoining Westminster Hall. It is called in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Hudibras</i>, “False Heaven, at the end of the Hall.” There were two other alehouses near Westminster Hall, called Hell and Purgatory.</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“Nor break his fast</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In Heaven and Hell.”</span>
						</p>
						<cite>Ben Jonson’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Alchemist</i>, act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span> <abbr>Sc.</abbr> 2</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-173" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-174" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This is the beginning of the Marquis of Montrose’s verses on the execution of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, which Pepys had set to music:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
						<p>
							<span>“Great, good, and just, could I but rate</span>
							<br/>
							<span>My grief and thy too rigid fate,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I’d weep the world to such a strain</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That it should deluge once again.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But since thy loud-tongued blood demands supplies</span>
							<br/>
							<span>More from Briareus’ hands, than Argus’ eyes,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>I’ll sing thy obsequies with trumpet sounds,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And write thy epitaph with blood and wounds.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-174" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-175" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This may be the Hope Tavern, or more probably the reach of the Thames. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-175" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-176" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr class="name">Gio.</abbr> Torriano, <abbr>M.A.</abbr>, a teacher of Italian in London, who edited a new edition of Florio’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Italian Dictionary</i>. His <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="it">Piazza Universale di Proverbi Italiani</i>, published in 1666, is exceedingly rare, as the greater part of the impression was burnt in the Fire of London. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-176" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-177" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Colonel John Jones, impeached, with General Ludlow and Miles Corbet, for treasonable practices in Ireland. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-177" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-178" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Probably Edward Waterhouse, an heraldic and miscellaneous writer, styled by Lloyd “as the learned, industrious, and ingenious <abbr class="name">E. W.</abbr> of Sion College.” His portrait was engraved by Loggan, and inserted in a book of his, entitled <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Fortescue Illustratus</i>, folio, 1663; he died in 1670. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-178" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-179" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Polexandre</i>, by Louis Le Roy de Gomberville, was first published in 1632. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The History of Polexander</i> was “done into English by <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Browne,” and published in folio, London, 1647. It was the earliest of the French heroic romances, and it appears to have been the model for the works of Calprenede and <abbr>Mdlle.</abbr> de Scuderi; see Dunlop’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Fiction</i> for the plot of the romance. <a href="../text/chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-179" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-180" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir Harry Wright, <abbr>M.P.</abbr> for Harwich created a baronet by Cromwell, 1658, and by Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, 1660. He married Anne, daughter of the first Lord Crew, and sister to Sir <abbr class="name">E.</abbr> Montagu’s wife, and resided at Dagenham, Essex. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-180" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-181" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Probably Judith Pepys, wife of <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Scott; see January 6th, 1659–60. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-181" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-182" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Thomas Fitch, colonel of a regiment of foot in 1658, <abbr>M.P.</abbr> for Inverness; also Lieutenant of the Tower. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-182" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-183" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Waterman White went to sea in May, 1661, and Pepys tried to get his place for Waterman Payne. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-183" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-184" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Roger Pepys, son of Talbot Pepys of Impington, a barrister of the Middle Temple, <abbr>M.P.</abbr> for Cambridge, 1661⁠–⁠78, and Recorder of that town, 1660⁠–⁠88. He married, for the third time, Parnell, daughter and heiress of John Duke, of Workingham, <abbr>co.</abbr> Suffolk, and this was the wedding for which the posy ring was required. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-184" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-185" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>There were several Rhenish wine-houses in different parts of London. There was one in Cannon Row, and another on the east side of King Street, Westminster. This latter was about the middle of the street. There is a token of “John Garrew at ye old Renishe Wine house, King Street, Westminster,” 1668 (see <i epub:type="se:name.pbublication.book">Boyne’s Trade Tokens</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Williamson, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 1889, <abbr>p.</abbr> 648). <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-185" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-186" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>It is supposed that the fashion of having mottoes inscribed on rings was of Roman origin. In the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries the posy was inscribed on the outside of the ring, and in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries it was placed inside. A small volume was published in 1674, entitled <i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">Love’s Garland: or Posies for Rings, Handkerchers and Gloves, and such pretty tokens that Lovers send their Loves</i>. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-186" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-187" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Links were torches of tow or pitch to light the way. <abbr>Ed.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-187" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-188" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Mercers Company as the patrons of <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul’s School. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-188" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-189" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Richard Cumberland, of <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul’s School, in his seventeenth year, was admitted a pensioner of Magdalene College in 1649, and in 1653 he was elected a Fellow of the College. In 1658 he got possession of the rectory of Brampton, but he was not legally instituted till 1661. He was presented to the rectory of All Saints, Stamford, in 1668. See Diary, March 18th, 1667, where Pepys writes: “The truth is, if he would accept of my sister’s fortune, I should give £100 more with him than to a man able to settle her four times as much as, I fear, he is able to do.” He dedicated his work on Jewish measures, 1686, to the <abbr>Hon.</abbr> <abbr class="name">S.</abbr> Pepys, “for that good affection being begun in your youth thirty years ago in Magdalene College, Cambridge.” He was made Bishop of Peterborough 1691, and died 1719, aged 86. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-189" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-190" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“<abbr>Feb.</abbr> 6th. General Monk being in his lodgings at Whitehall, had notice that the House had a desire to see him. He came into the Court of Wards, and being there, the Sergeant-at-Arms went to meet him with the mace, and his Lordship attended the Sergeant, who went before him with the mace on his shoulder, being accompanied with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Scott and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Robinson.”</p>
						<cite>Rugge’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diurnal</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-190" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-191" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>His shop was in <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul’s Churchyard. See ante, January 24th, 1659–60. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-191" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-192" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Colet, Dean of <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul’s, born 1466, died September 16th, 1519. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-192" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-193" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“Fox, or some other ‘weighty’ friend, on hearing of this, complained to Monk, who issued the following order, dated March 9th: ‘I do require all officers and soldiers to forbear to disturb peaceable meetings of the Quakers, they doing nothing prejudicial to the Parliament or the Commonwealth of England. George Monk.’ This order, we are told, had an excellent effect on the soldiers.”</p>
						<cite><abbr class="name">A. C.</abbr> Bickley’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">George Fox and the Early Quakers</i>, London, 1884, <abbr>p.</abbr> 179</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>The Quakers were at this time just coming into notice. The first preaching of George Fox, the founder, was in 1648, and in 1655 the preachers of the sect numbered seventy-three. Fox computed that there were seldom less than a thousand quakers in prison. The statute 13 and 14 <abbr>Car.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <abbr>cap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> (1662) was “An act for preventing the mischiefs and dangers that may arise by certain persons called quakers and others, refusing to take lawful oaths.” Billing is mentioned again on July 22nd, 1667, when he addressed Pepys in Westminster Hall. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-193" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-194" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Private cryptic code⁠—<abbr>Ed.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-194" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-195" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Oliver <abbr>St.</abbr> John, born about 1598 called to the Bar as a member of Lincoln’s Inn, 1626; <abbr>M.P.</abbr> for Totnes, 1640; Solicitor-General, January, 1640–1; Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, 1648, and afterwards Lord Chief Justice of the Upper Bench. He died December 31st, 1673. His first wife, Johanna Altham, was aunt to Oliver Cromwell and to John Hampden. His second wife was Elizabeth Cromwell, first cousin to Oliver. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-195" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-196" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>College Entry Book, Junij 27, 1651: “<span xml:lang="la">Thomas ffossan, filius Thomæ ffossan, civis Londinensis, annum agens decimū Septimū e schola de <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary Axe apud Londinenses, admissus est Pensionarius, tutore Dno. Moreland.</span>”—<abbr class="name">M. B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-196" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-197" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Charles Carter, a minister in Huntingdonshire; see December 23rd, 1660. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-197" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-198" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Thurloe, born 1616; Secretary of State to Cromwell; <abbr>M.P.</abbr> for Ely, 1656, and for the University of Cambridge in Richard Cromwell’s Parliament of December, 1658. He was never employed after the Restoration, although the King solicited his services. He died February 21st, 1668. Pepys spells the name Thurlow, which was a common spelling at the time. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-198" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-199" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Balthasar <abbr>St.</abbr> Michel. Pepys seems to have done well for his brother-in-law in later life, although, from the entries in the Diary, he does not appear to have had a high opinion of him. <abbr>St.</abbr> Michel was Muster Master at Deal in 1674, Storekeeper at Tangier in 1681, and Naval Commissioner at Deptford in 1685. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-199" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-200" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This was a constant trouble to the pedestrian until the rule of passing to the right of the person met was generally accepted. Gay commences his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Trivia</i> with an allusion to this⁠—</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“When to assert the wall, and when resign⁠—”</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>and the epigram on the haughty courtier and the scholar is well known. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-200" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-201" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The King’s Bench was called the Upper Bench at the time of the Commonwealth, when the word King was abolished universally. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-201" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-202" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir Robert Pye, the elder, was auditor of the Exchequer, and a staunch Royalist. He garrisoned his house at Faringdon, which was besieged by his son, of the same names, a decided Republican, son- in-law to Hampden, and colonel of horse under Fairfax. The son, here spoken of, was subsequently committed to the Tower for presenting a petition to the House of Commons from the county of Berks, which he represented in Parliament, complaining of the want of a settled form of government. He had, however, the courage to move for an habeas corpus, but judge Newdigate decided that the courts of law had not the power to discharge him. Upon Monk’s coming to London, the secluded members passed a vote to liberate Pye, and at the Restoration he was appointed equerry to the King. He died in 1701.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-202" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-203" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Richard, fifth Earl of Dorset, died 1677. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-203" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-204" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This was the Sackville College for the poor, at East Grinstead, founded by Robert Sackville, second Earl of Dorset, who died in 1608. There is a good account of Sackville College in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Gentleman’s Magazine</i> for December, 1848.—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-204" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-205" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Court of Wards and Liveries was first erected in the reign of Henry <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span> for the administration of the estates of the king’s wards during their minority, and for delivery of seizin upon coming of age. The court was practically put an end to by the Long Parliament (by resolution of both houses), and was abolished 12 <abbr>Car.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-205" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-206" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir Thomas Widdrington and Sergeants Thomas Tyrrell and John Fountaine had just been appointed Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-206" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-207" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>There are tokens of George Bryan at the Sugar Loaf without Temple Bar (see <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Boyne’s Trade Tokens</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Williamson, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 1889, <abbr>p.</abbr> 761). <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-207" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-208" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The quaker mentioned before on the 7th of this month. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-208" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-209" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Thomas Allen, afterwards created a baronet. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-209" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-210" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Matthew Lock, the famous composer, was a native of Exeter and a chorister in the cathedral of that city. He was employed to write some triumphal music for performance during the King’s progress from the Tower to Whitehall. After which he was appointed composer in ordinary totheKing. The music to <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Macbeth</i>, associated with his name, is by many attributed to Purcell. Lock became a Roman Catholic, and resigning his appointment at the Chapel Royal was made organist to the Queen at Somerset House. He died in August, 1677. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-210" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-211" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Committee of Public Safety consisted of the following members: Fleetwood, Lambert, Desborough, Steel, Whitelocke, Vane, Ludlow, Sydenham, Salloway, Strickland, Berry, Lawrence, Sir James Harrington, Johnston of Warriston, Henry Brandreth, Cornelius Holland, Colonels Hewson, Clarke, Bennet, and Lilburn. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-211" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-212" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Praise God Barebone (or Barbon), an active member of the Parliament called by his name. About this period he had appeared at the head of a band of fanatics, and alarmed Monk, who well knew his influence. He was a leather seller in Fleet Street. He died January, 1679–80, and was buried at <abbr>St.</abbr> Andrew’s, Holborn. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-212" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-213" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Thomas Scott, referred to on January 10th of this year, and Luke Robinson. Both were members of Parliament and of the Council of State. They were selected, as firm adherents of the Rump, to watch Monk’s proceedings. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-213" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-214" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>An eminent merchant actively engaged in the African trade, and one of the farmers of the Customs. He had advanced large sums to assist Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, who knighted him, January 1st, 1641. He was elected member of Parliament for Winchelsea in the Long Parliament, but expelled February 2nd, 1641. He was one of the Commission sent to Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> at Breda, and created a baronet April 16th, 1665. He died February 26th, 1665–6, and was buried in the church of <abbr>St.</abbr> Mildred, Bread Street. His mansion at Hammersmith stood on the site of Brandenburgh House. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-214" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-215" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Star tavern was in Cheapside. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-215" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-216" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Described in Maitland’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of London</i> as a handsome bridge crossing the Strand, near the east end of Catherine Street, under which a small stream glided from the fields into the Thames, near Somerset House. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-216" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-217" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Where stands the church of <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary-le-Strand. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-217" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-218" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Nathaniel Holmes, <abbr>D.D.</abbr>, of Exeter College, Oxford. He was the intruding incumbent of <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary Staining, London, and ejected by the Act of Uniformity, and died in 1676. He was a very learned, but voluminous and fanciful writer. A list of his works is given in Wood’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Athenæ</i> (<abbr>ed.</abbr> Bliss), <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>, 1160. See also Kennett’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Register</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 827. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-218" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-219" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Anne Clarges, said to be the daughter of a blacksmith, but a more distinguished parentage has been given to her brother. She was bred a milliner, and became first mistress of General Monk and afterwards (1654) his wife. It was said that when she married Monk she had a husband named Radford living. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-219" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-220" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Monk lodged at the Glasshouse in Broad Street. “<abbr>Feb.</abbr> 12, 1659–60, Monk drew up his forces in Finsbury, dined with the Lord Mayor, had conference with him and the Court of Aldermen, retired to the Bull Head in Cheapside, and quartered at the Glass-House in Broad Street.”—Whitelocke. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-220" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-221" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Joseph Kirton was a bookseller in <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul’s Churchyard, at the sign of “The King's Arms,” ruined by the Fire of London. His death, in October, 1667, is recorded in Smith’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Obituary</i>, printed for the Camden Society. He was buried in <abbr>St.</abbr> Faith’s. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-221" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-222" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Edward Pepys of Broomsthorpe, <abbr>co.</abbr> Norfolk, and of the Middle Temple, born 1617; married Elizabeth, daughter and co-heiress of John Walpole of Broomsthorpe. He was brother of <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Turner, and died December 22nd, 1663. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-222" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-223" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Roger Pepys. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-223" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-224" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Pepys calls Charles Glasscock cousin under July 29th, 1661, but he was really no relation. He was brother-in-law of his first cousin’s wife (Judith Pepys, née Cutter). Glasscock lived in Fleet Street (see April 22nd, 1661). <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-224" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-225" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Playford (1623-1693), the music-seller, whose shop was in the Temple. His <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Introduction to the Skill of Musick</i>, first published in 1655, went through many editions. He was known as “Honest John Playford,” and was succeeded in his business by his son Henry. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-225" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-226" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The practice of choosing valentines was very general at this time, but some of the best examples of the custom are found in this Diary. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-226" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-227" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Thomas Lord Fairfax, mentioned before. He had succeeded to the Scotch barony of Fairfax of Cameron, on the death of his father in 1647; even after his accession to the title he is frequently styled “Sir Thomas” in the pamphlets and papers of the day. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-227" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-228" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir <abbr class="name">H.</abbr> Vane the younger had married Frances, daughter of Sir Christopher Wray of Ashby, Lincolnshire <abbr class="eoc">Bart.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-228" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-229" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Roger Cuttance, a native of Weymouth, appointed captain of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Peace</i> frigate in 1651, and to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Naseby</i> in 1657. He was knighted, July 1st, 1665, after having in the battle of June 3rd mainly contributed to the defeat of the Dutch. He afterwards fell into disgrace. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-229" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-230" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Anne Pepys, of Worcestershire, married <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Fisher for her second husband. (See June 12th, 1662.) <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-230" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-231" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Edward Walgrave (or Waldegrave) was the father of Jemima, wife of John Crew, afterwards Lord Crew. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-231" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-232" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Herring was a merchant in Colman Street. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-232" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-233" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Thomas Fuller’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Church History of Britain</i>, London, 1656, folio, is in the Pepysian Library. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-233" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-234" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Kate, wife of Anthony Joyce, who kept the Three Stags at Holborn Conduit. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-234" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-235" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Nicholas Osborne, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Gauden’s clerk. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-235" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-236" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Frances Butler, the great beauty, who is sometimes styled <i xml:lang="fr">la belle Boteler</i>. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-236" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-237" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“They were brought to the place of execution, which was at Charing Cross, and over against Somerset House in the Strand, where were two gibbets erected. These men were the grand actors in the mutinies at Gravesend, at Somerset House, and in <abbr>St.</abbr> James’ Fields.”</p>
						<cite>Rugge’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diurnal</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-237" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-238" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Purl is hot beer flavoured with wormwood or other aromatic herbs. The name is also given to hot beer flavoured with gin, sugar, and ginger. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-238" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-239" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Thomas Gregory was, in 1672, Clerk of the Cheque at Chatham. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-239" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-240" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This pamphlet is among the Thomason Collection of Civil War Tracts (British Museum), and dated in <abbr>MS.</abbr> this same day, February 20th⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">A Plea for Limited Monarchy as it was established in this Nation before the late War. In an Humble Address to his Excellency General Monck. By a Zealot for the good old Laws of his Country, before any Faction or Caprice, with additions</i>. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">An Eccho to the Plea for Limited Monarchy, <abbr>etc.</abbr></i>, was published soon afterwards. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-240" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-241" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Chancery Row must have been near the end of the hall where the Court of Chancery was situated. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-241" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-242" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This remarkable speech is given at length by Rugge, who adds that about fourscore of the secluded members attended the first meeting of the House. It is highly probable that Monk had ascertained that they were ready to support him, before he committed himself to the Parliament.—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-242" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-243" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>William Prynne, born 1600, well known by his voluminous publications, and the persecution which he endured. He was <abbr>M.P.</abbr> for Bath, 1660, and died October 24th, 1669. Appointed Keeper of Tower Records, 1660. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-243" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-244" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Matthew Lock, see ante, February 11th, 1659-60. Henry Purcell, father of the celebrated composer, was gentleman of the Chapel Royal, member of the Royal Band, singing-man at Westminster Abbey, master of the boys there, and music copyist. He died 1664. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-244" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-245" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Richard Brown, WilHam Wilde, John Robinson, and William Vincent. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-245" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-246" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir George Booth of Dunham Massey, <abbr>Bart.</abbr>, created Baron De la Mere, 1661, for his services in behalf of the King. At this time he was a prisoner in the Tower, from which he was released the next day. Died 1684. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-246" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-247" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Silas Taylor published <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The History of Gavel-kind</i> in 1663. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-247" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-248" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Richard Brown, a major-general of the Parliament forces, citizen of London and a woodmonger; Sheriff of London, 1647. He was imprisoned for five years, but in Richard Cromwell’s Parliament he was one of the members for London. He was one of the deputation from the City of London to Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> at Breda, and he and his eldest son were knighted. Lord Mayor, 1660; he was created a baronet for his prompt action during Venner’s insurrection, and the City rewarded him with a pension of £500. He died September 24th, 1669. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-248" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-249" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Boiled salt beef. To powder was to sprinkle with salt, and the powdering tub a vessel in which meat was salted. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-249" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-250" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This support for the neck is mentioned on the previous February 1st, where <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Scott and her husband are said to have promised to get it made. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-250" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-251" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>William Pierrepoint, <abbr>M.P.</abbr> of Thoresby, second son to Robert, first Earl of Kingston, and known as “Wise” Pierrepoint. He died 1679, aged 71. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-251" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-252" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The old Falcon Inn is on the south side of Petty Cury. It is now divided into three houses, one of which is the present Falcon Inn, the other two being houses with shops. The Falcon yard is but little changed. From the size of the whole building it must have been the principal inn of the town. The room said to have been used by Queen Elizabeth for receptions retains its original form.⁠—<abbr class="name">M.</abbr> <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-252" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-253" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Petty Cury. The derivation of the name of this street, so well known to all Cambridge men, is a matter of much dispute among antiquaries. (See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Notes and Queries</i>.) The most probable meaning of it is the <em>Parva Cokeria</em>, or <em>little cury</em>, where the cooks of the town lived, just as “The Poultry,” where the Poulters (now Poulterers) had their shops. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Forme of Cury</i>, a Roll of Antient English Cookery, was compiled by the principal cooks of that “best and royalest viander of all Christian Kings,” Richard the Second, and edited with a copious Index and Glossary by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Samuel Pegge, 1780.⁠—<abbr class="name">M.</abbr> <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-253" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-254" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Extract from admission-book of Christ’s College, Cambridge:</p>
					<blockquote xml:lang="la">
						<header>
							<p>“<abbr>Febr.</abbr> 25°. 1660.</p>
						</header>
						<p>“Johannes a Johanne Pepys Londini natus literas edoctus a D<sup>no</sup> Crumbleholm Scholæ Paulinæ Moderatore annos natus 18 admissus est Sizator sub M<sup>ro</sup>. Widdrington.</p>
						<p>“Hic cum prius admissus est in Collegium Magdalense Maii 26<sup>to</sup>. ut ex literis testimonialibus constat ejusdem etiam anni apud nos habendus est.”</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>—M. B. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-254" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-255" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This might read “Pepys’s scholars,” but there do not appear to have been any such scholars. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-255" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-256" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>Joseph Hill, a native of Yorkshire, chosen in 1649 Fellow of Magdalene College, and in 1659 University Proctor: he afterwards retired to London, and, according to Calamy, was offered a bishopric by Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, which he declined, disliking the terms of conformity and accepting a call to the English Church at Rotterdam in 1678, died there in 1707, aged 83.</p>
						<cite>
							<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Nonconformists’ Memorial</i>
						</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>—B. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-256" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-257" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Clement Zanchy, admitted at Magdalene College, Cambridge, 1648, and Foundation Fellow, 1654. At the College meetings he spelt his name “Zanchy,” at first, but in 1656 he changed it to “Sankey,” and it is sometimes spelt “Sanchy.”—<abbr class="name">M.</abbr> <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-257" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-258" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Hezekiah Burton, of Lound, Nottinghamshire, pensioner of Magdalene College, 1647. His admission to a Wray Fellowship is curious:</p>
					<blockquote xml:lang="la">
						<header>
							<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">“<abbr>Mar.</abbr> 8. 1650.</p>
						</header>
						<p>“Hezekias Burton in Artibus Baccalaureus hujus Collij, authoritate ordinationis Parliamentariæ, admissus est in sodalitium M<sup>ri</sup>. Johannis David, eadem authoritate vacant.”</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>The last word is not quite clear.—<abbr class="name">M.</abbr> <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-258" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-259" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Percival Angier. His affairs appear to have got into disorder at the end of 1663, and he became a bankrupt. He died in January, 1664–65, and was buried on the 19th of that month. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-259" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-260" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>William Fairbrother, Fellow of King’s College, Cambridge, was made <abbr>D.D.</abbr> of Cambridge, <i xml:lang="la">per Regias litteras</i>, in 1661. He was taken prisoner at the battle of Naseby while fighting on the King’s side, and sent to London. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-260" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-261" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A pamphlet by George Bate, <abbr>M.D.</abbr>, first published anonymously in 1649, and frequently reprinted. It was translated into Italian and published at Venice in 1652. After the Restoration it was reprinted and a second part added. The following is the title: “<span xml:lang="it">Elenchus Motuum nuperorum in Anglia; simul ac juris Regii at Parlamentarii brevis enarratio. <abbr>A.</abbr> 2455 Lutetiæ Parisiorum pro <abbr>R. R. An. Dom.</abbr> 1649</span>.” 12º. Address to the reader signed “Theodorus Veridicus.” “<span xml:lang="it">Elenchi Motuum Nuperorum in Anglia pars prima; simul ac Juris Regii &amp; Parlamentarii brevis enarratio, ab autore <abbr class="name">Geor.</abbr> Batio, <abbr>M.D.</abbr> Regiæ Majestatis Protomedico recognita &amp; aucta Ære Christianæ Anno 1660. Londini typis <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Flesher &amp; prostant apud <abbr class="name">R.</abbr> Royston in Ivy Lane, 1661</span>.” <abbr>8vo.</abbr> “<span xml:lang="it">Pars <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Secunda. Simul ac Regiæ Effugii mirabilis è Prætio Wigornia enarratio. Londini, 1663</span>.” <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-261" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-262" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Tripos or Bachelor of the Stool, who made the speech on Ash Wednesday, when the senior Proctor called him up and exhorted him to be witty but modest withal. Their speeches, especially after the Restoration, tended to be boisterous, and even scurrilous. “26 Martii 1669. D<sup>s</sup> Hollis, fellow of Clare Hall is to make a publick Recantation in the <abbr>Bac.</abbr> Schools for his Tripos speeche.” The Tripos verses still come out, and are circulated on Ash Wednesday. The list of successful candidates for honours is printed on the same paper, hence the term “Tripos” applied to it. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-262" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-263" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Peachell, Vicar of Stanwick and Prebendary of Carlisle, made Master of Magdalene College, 1679, suspended from that office and deprived of the Vice-Chancellorship, May 7th, 1687, for refusing to admit Alban Francis, a Benedictine monk, to the degree of Master of Arts without his taking the oaths. He was restored by James <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>’s letter to the Mastership, October, 1688, and died 1690.</p>
					<p>A copy of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Peachell’s sentence as it was fixed on the publick School Doors and Magdalene College Gates:</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“By His Majesties Commissioners for Ecclesiastical Causes and for the Visitation of the University and of every Collegiate and Cathedral Churches, Colledges, Grammar Schools, Hospitals and other the like Incorporations, or Foundations or Societies.</p>
						<p>“Whereas John Peachell, <abbr>D<sup>r</sup>.</abbr> of Divinity, Vice Chancellour of Cambridge, Master of Magdalen Colledge, in the said University, has been conveñd before us for his disobedience to his Majesties Royal Letters mandatory and other his contempts: and the said <abbr>D<sup>r</sup>.</abbr> John Peachell having been fully heard thereupon, we have thought fit after mature consideration of the matter to declare, decree and pronounce that the said <abbr>D<sup>r</sup>.</abbr> John Peachell, shall for the said disobedience and contempt, be deprived from being Vice Chancellour of the said University, and from all power of acting in the same: and also that he be suspended <i xml:lang="la">ab officio et beneficio</i> of his Mastership of the said Colledge, during his Majesties pleasure: and accordingly we do by these presents deprive him the said <abbr>D<sup>r</sup>.</abbr> John Peachell from being Vice Chancellour of the said University and from all power of acting in the same. And we also suspend him <i xml:lang="la">ab officio et beneficio</i> of his Mastership of the said Colledge, peremptorily admonishing and requiring him hereby to abstain from the function of Master of the said Colledge, during the said suspension under pain of deprivation from his said Mastership. And we also further order and decree, that the profit and perquisites belonging to his, said Mastership, shall during the same suspension be applyed to the use and benefit of the said Colledge.</p>
						<p>“Given under our Seal, the 7th day of May 1687.”</p>
						<p>“Finis.”</p>
					</blockquote>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“I find in the first Lord Dartmouth’s manuscript notes on Bishop Burnet’s History, that <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Peachell afterwards starved himself to death, Archbishop Sancroft having rebuked him for setting an ill example in the University by drunkenness and other loose behaviour. He did penance by four days’ abstinence, after which he would have eaten but could not.”</p>
						<cite>From the Master of Magdalene’s “private” book</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>For his <em>red nose</em>, which made Pepys ashamed to be seen with him, see Diary, May 3rd, 1667.—<abbr class="name">M.</abbr> <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-263" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-264" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Rose tavern opened on the Market Hill at the end of Rose Crescent.—<abbr class="name">M.</abbr> <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-264" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-265" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Then the residence of James Howard, third Earl of Suffolk. It was built by Thomas, the first earl, at the commencement of the seventeenth century, and called after his maternal ancestor. Lord Chancellor Audley, to whom the monastery of Walden, the site of which is occupied by the present house, had been granted at the Dissolution.—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-265" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-266" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The inscription and the bowl are still to be seen at King Edward <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>’s almshouses, Saffron Walden. There is an engraving and description of this bowl in <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">W. H.</abbr> <abbr>St.</abbr> John Hope’s paper, “On the English mediæval drinking bowls called Mazers,” in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Archæologia</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> 1 (<abbr>p.</abbr> 163 and plate <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>). <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-266" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-267" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Royal Exchange. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-267" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-268" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Edward Reynolds, <abbr>D.D.</abbr>, Preacher of Lincoln’s Inn; Dean of Christ Church, 1648–50; Bishop of Norwich, 1660–1676. He died July 28th, 1676, aged 76. The sermon which Pepys heard was printed, and has the following title: “The Wall and Glory of Jerusalem, in a Sermon preached in <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul’s Church, London, before the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor, Lord General, Aldermen, Common Council and Companies of the Honourable City of London, February 28, 1659, being a day of solemn Thanksgiving unto God for restoring the Parliament and Common Council and for preserving the City. By Edward Reynolds, <abbr>D.D.</abbr> London, 1660.” <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-268" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-269" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Grocers’ Hall was the scene of many important occurrences during the period of the Great Rebellion. This was the first hall on the present site between the Poultry and Princes Street, which was built in 1427, The second hall was built after the Great Fire, and the present one was opened in 1802. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-269" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-270" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Changed his dress. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-270" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-271" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>William Howe is frequently mentioned in the Diary, and he appears more than once to have got into trouble. He is mentioned as Deputy Treasurer of the Navy, under date September 18th, 1665. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-271" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-272" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>As the Greyhound is mentioned so soon after the Plough it also may have been in Fleet Street. See November 12th, 1661. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-272" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-273" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Probably Joyce Norton, see ante, January 7th, 1659–60. <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-273" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-274" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A liquor made of honey and water, boiled and fermenting. By 12 Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <abbr>cap.</abbr> 23, a grant of certain impositions upon beer, ale, and other liquors, a duty of ½<abbr class="currency">d.</abbr> per gallon was laid upon “all metheglin or mead.” <a href="../text/chapter-2.xhtml#noteref-274" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-275" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Thomas Crew, eldest son of John, afterwards first Lord Crew. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-275" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-276" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Son of Sir Christopher Yelverton, the first baronet, grandson of Sir Henry Yelverton, Judge <abbr>C.P.</abbr>, author of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reports</i>. He married Susan, Baroness Grey de Ruthyn, which title descended to his issue. His son was afterwards advanced to the dignity of Viscount Longueville, and his grandson to the earldom of Sussex. The Yelverton Collection of <abbr>MSS.</abbr> belongs to Lord Calthorpe, whose ancestor married a daughter of the first Viscount Longueville.—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-276" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-277" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Probably the Sun tavern in King Street, Westminster (see August 3rd, 1668). There is a token of this house described in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Boyne’s Trade Tokens</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Williamson, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 1889, <abbr>p.</abbr> 649. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-277" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-278" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Leg tavern in King Street appears to have been a house of good resort. It is mentioned in Burton’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diary</i> as the scene of a dinner of the Clothworkers’ Company, December 18th, 1656, who had then a cause before the House of Commons. Pepys frequently visited it. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-278" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-279" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, or George Monk, or Richard Cromwell. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-279" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-280" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Compare a letter of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Luttrell to Ormond, March 9th, 1660, in Carte’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Letters</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 312:</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“Yesterday there was a debate about the form of the dissolution, when <abbr>M<sup>r</sup>.</abbr> Prynne asserted the King’s right in such bold language that I think he may be styled the Cato of this age.”</p>
						<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Notes and Queries</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 2</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>—<abbr class="name">M.</abbr> <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-280" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-281" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Creed of Oundle, <abbr class="eoc">Esq.</abbr> From the way in which Pepys speaks of his friend, he was probably of humble origin, and nothing is known of his history previously to the Restoration, when he seems to have been a retainer in the service of Sir Edward Montagu. In 1662 he was made Secretary to the Commissioners for Tangier, and in 1668 he married Elizabeth Pickering, the niece of his original patron, by whom he had eleven children. Major Richard Creed, the eldest son, who was killed at the battle of Blenheim, lies buried in Tichmarsh Church, in Northamptonshire, where there is also a monument erected to his father, describing him as “of Oundle,” and as having served King Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> in divers honourable employments at home and abroad, lived with honour, and died lamented, <abbr class="era">A.D.</abbr> 1701. What these employments were cannot now be ascertained. There exists still a cenotaph to the memory of the major in Westminster Abbey. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Creed, wife of John Creed of Oundle, <abbr>Esq.</abbr>, was the only daughter of Sir Gilbert Pickering, <abbr>Bart.</abbr>, by Elizabeth, only daughter of Sir Edward Montagu, and sister of Edward Montagu, first Earl of Sandwich. See Malone’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of Dryden</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 339.—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-281" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-282" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Warwick House, on the north side of Holborn, a little to the west of Gray’s Inn Gate. It had given place to Warwick Court in 1708. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-282" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-283" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Edward Montagu, second Earl of Manchester, the Parliamentary General, afterwards particularly instrumental in the King’s Restoration, became Chamberlain of the Household, <abbr>K.G.</abbr>, a Privy Councillor, and Chancellor of the University of Cambridge. He died in 1671, having been five times married. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-283" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-284" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir Dudley North, <abbr>K.B.</abbr>, became the fourth Lord North on the death of his father in 1666. He died 1677. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-284" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-285" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John, third son of William, first Viscount Say and Sele, and one of Oliver’s Lords. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-285" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-286" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>George, fourteenth Lord Berkeley of Berkeley, created Viscount Dursley and Earl of Berkeley, 1679. There were at this time two Lord Berkeleys, each possessing a town house called after his name, which misled Pennant. George, fourteenth Lord Berkeley of Berkeley, advanced to an earldom in 1679, the peer here spoken of, lived at Berkeley House, in the parish of <abbr>St.</abbr> John’s, Clerkenwell, which had been in his family for three generations, and he had a country-seat at Durdans, near Epsom, mentioned by Evelyn and Pepys. He presented the library of his uncle, Sir Robert Coke, to Sion College, and that institution possesses a painted portrait of the earl in his robes. He died October 14th, 1698. The other nobleman, originally known as Sir John Berkeley, and in the service of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, created in 1658 Baron Berkeley of Stratton, subsequently filled many high offices in the State. See post, July 12th, 1660. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-286" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-287" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>There is a token of “Edmund Browne at the Pall Mall,” on which he describes himself as “Strong water man” (see <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Boyne’s Trade Tokens</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Williamson, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 1889, <abbr>p.</abbr> 694). <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-287" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-288" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>, Gustavus, King of Sweden, died on February 3rd, 1659–60 (see March 8th). <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-288" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-289" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Orpheus’ hymn, “King of Heaven and Hell and Sea and Earth,” by Henry Lawes, is printed in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Second Book of Ayres and Dialogues. London (Playlord), 1655</i>. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-289" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-290" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The theorbo was a bass lute. Having gut strings it was played with the fingers. There is a humorous comparison of the long waists of ladies, which came into fashion about 1621, with the theorbo, by Bishop Corbet:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>“She was barr’d up in whale-bones, that did leese</span>
							<br/>
							<span>None of the whale’s length, for they reached her knees;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Off with her head, and then she hath a middle</span>
							<br/>
							<span>As her waste stands, just like the new found fiddle,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The favourite <em>Theorbo</em>, truth to tell ye,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whose neck and throat are deeper than the belly.”</span>
						</p>
						<cite>Corbet, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Iter Boreale</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-290" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-291" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>There is a token of the Salutation at Billingsgate (see <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Boyne’s Trade Tokens</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Williamson, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 1889, <abbr>p.</abbr> 531). <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-291" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-292" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The body of Poor Knights of Windsor was founded by Edward <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. The intention of the king with regard to the poor knights was to provide relief and comfortable subsistence for such valiant soldiers as happened in their old age to fall into poverty and decay. On September 20th, 1659, a Report having been read respecting the Poor Knights of Windsor, the House “ordered that it be referred to a Committee, to look into the revenue for maintenance of the Poor Knights of Windsor,” <abbr>etc.</abbr> (See Tighe and Davis’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Annals of Windsor</i>.) <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-292" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-293" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Goods. He went to sea with Sir Edward Montagu. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-293" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-294" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Swiftsure</i> was a second-rate of sixty guns, built at Woolwich in 1654 by Christopher Pett. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-294" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-295" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nazeby</i> was commanded by Captain, afterwards Sir Richard Stayner. It was a first-rate of eighty guns, built at Woolwich in 1655 by Christopher Pett. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-295" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-296" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Major-General Overton was committed to the Tower in 1649, 1655, and in December, 1660. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-296" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-297" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>See note, April 11th, 1660, where it is stated that Monk had dined at nine of the halls. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-297" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-298" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Evelyn, about the same date (August 9th, 1661), “tried several experiments on the sensitive plant and humilis, which contracted with the least touch of the sun through a burning glass, though it rises and opens only when it shines on it.” <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-298" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-299" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Angel tavern in King Street, Westminster. A token of this house, kept by <abbr class="name">Will.</abbr> Carter, is described in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Boyne’s Trade Tokens</i>, by Williamson, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 1889, <abbr>p.</abbr> 647. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-299" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-300" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Cock alehouse at Temple Bar was originally called the Cock and Bottle, and dates back to the reign of James <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. It was pulled down in 1882. There is a very scarce token of the house, dated 1665 (see <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Boyne’s Trade Tokens</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Williamson, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 1889, <abbr>p.</abbr> 762). <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-300" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-301" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Sun tavern behind the Royal Exchange was a famous house in its day. A token of it is described in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Boyne’s Trade Tokens</i>, by Williamson, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 1889, <abbr>p.</abbr> 591. It was rebuilt by John Wadlow after the Great Fire. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-301" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-302" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Brampton in Huntingdonshire, where Pepys was probably born, and where his father afterwards retired. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-302" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-303" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Pepys, younger brother of Samuel; Paulina, sister of Samuel, afterwards <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Jackson. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-303" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-304" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Richard Hutchinson was Deputy Treasurer to Sir Henry Vane, whom he succeeded as Treasurer of the Navy in 1651. He continued to hold the office until the Restoration. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-304" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-305" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>There were several Dog taverns in London, but the one at Westminster mentioned by Pepys was the famous tavern in King Street, which was frequented previously by Ben Jonson. It was chiefly resorted to by Cavaliers. There is a token of the “Black Dogg” (see <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Boyne’s Trade Tokens</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Williamson, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 1889, <abbr>p.</abbr> 649). <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-305" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-306" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>, Gustavus, son of John Casimir, Count Palatine of the Rhine. He succeeded his cousin Christina, who resigned the crown in 1654. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-306" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-307" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Painted Chamber, or <abbr>St.</abbr> Edward’s Chamber, in the old Palace at Westminster. The first name was given to it from the curious paintings on the walls, and the second from the tradition that Edward the Confessor died in it. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-307" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-308" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This is the first notice in the Diary of the Navy Office in Crutched Friars. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-308" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-309" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>His father was a tailor, and this was his cutting-out room. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-309" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-310" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Bowyer, of Huntsmore, Bucks, was an old friend of Pepys, and, according to a habit of the time, he sometimes styled him father (see November 7th, 1660). This misled Lord Braybrooke into supposing that he was <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Pepys’s stepfather. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-310" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-311" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Daniel Rawlinson, the Royalist host of the Mitre in Fenchurch Street. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-311" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-312" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Thomas Hater appears to have been a clerk at the Navy Office before Pepys went there. In July, 1660, he became Pepys’s clerk; in 1674 he was appointed Clerk of the Acts, and in 1679 Secretary of the Admiralty. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-312" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-313" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Huntsmore, a hamlet belonging to Iver, in which parish Robert Bowyer founded a free school about 1750.—Lysons’ <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>Hist.</abbr> of Bucks</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 587. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-313" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-314" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Speaker</i> was renamed the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Mary</i> after the Restoration. It was built at Woolwich by Christopher Pett in 1649. It was a third-rate of fifty-four guns and 395 tonnage. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-314" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-315" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Clement Clerke of Lawnde Abbey, <abbr>co.</abbr> Leicester, created a baronet in 1661. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-315" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-316" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Robert Montagu, Viscount Mandeville, eldest son of the Earl of Manchester, whom he succeeded in 1671. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-316" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-317" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Robert Bernard, created a baronet in 1662, served in Parliament for Huntingdon, before and after the Restoration, and died in 1666. His son and successor, Sir John Bernard, the second baronet, at the time of his death, in 1669, was one of the knights of the shire for the county of Huntingdon. The inscription upon his monument in Brampton Church is given in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Topographer and Genealogist</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 113. Sir Nicholas Pedley, who was also burgess for Huntingdon, married a daughter of Sir Robert Bernard.—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-317" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-318" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Burr, the clerk who accompanied Pepys to sea. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-318" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-319" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Rolls Chapel, where were kept the rolls and records of the Court of Chancery until the erection of the Record Office in Fetter Lane in 1856. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-319" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-320" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>On February 28th Pepys styles the Royal Exchange the Old Exchange; now it is the Great Exchange. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-320" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-321" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“Then the writing in golden letters, that was engraven under the statue of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, in the Royal Exchange (<i xml:lang="la">Exit tyrannus, Regum ultimus, anno libertatis Angliae, anno Domini 1648, Januarie <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxx</span>.</i>) was washed out by a painter, who in the day time raised a ladder, and with a pot and brush washed the writing quite out, threw down his pot and brush and said it should never do him any more service, in regard that it had the honour to put out rebels’ handwriting. He then came down, took away his ladder, not a misword said to him, and by whose order it was done was not then known. The merchants were glad and joyful, many people were gathered together, and against the Exchange made a bonfire.</p>
						<cite>Rugge’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diurnal</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>In the Thomason Collection of Civil War Tracts at the British Museum is a pamphlet which is dated in <abbr>MS.</abbr> March 21st, 1659⁠–⁠60, where this act is said to be by order of Monk: “The Loyal Subjects Teares for the Sufferings and Absence of their Sovereign Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, King of England, Scotland, and Ireland; with an Observation upon the expunging of <i xml:lang="la">Exit Tyrannus, Regum ultimus</i>, by order of General Monk, and some Advice to the Independents, Anabaptists, Phanatiques, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> London, 1660.” <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-321" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-322" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Harp</i> was a sixth-rate of eight guns, built at Dublin in 1656. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-322" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-323" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Laud Crisp was afterwards page to Lady Sandwich. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-323" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-324" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Thomas Blagrave was one of the Gentlemen of the Royal Chapel, and a cornet-player of repute. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-324" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-325" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Major Richard Creed, who commanded a troop under Lambert when that general surrendered to Ingoldsby: see April 24th following. He was imprisoned with the rest of the officers, but his name does not recur in the Diary, nor is it known whether he was related to John Creed, so frequently mentioned hereafter. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-325" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-326" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><dfn>Foy</dfn>. A feast given by one who is about to leave a place. In Kent, according to Grose, a treat to friends, either at going abroad or coming home. See Diary, November 25th, 1661. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-326" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-327" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><dfn>Monteeres</dfn>, <i xml:lang="es">montero</i> (Spanish), a kind of huntsman’s cap. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-327" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-328" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>In the <abbr>MS.</abbr> there is the following note appended to this: “In an error here, for I did not take leave of them till the next day.” <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-328" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-329" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“In this month the wind was very high, and caused great tides, so that great hurt was done to the inhabitants of Westminster, King Street being quite drowned. The Maidenhead boat was cast away, and twelve persons with her. Also, about Dover the waters brake in upon the mainland; and in Kent was very much damage done; so that report said, there was £20,000 worth of harm done.”</p>
						<cite>Rugge’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diurnal</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-329" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-330" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>William, second son of Edward, first Lord Montagu of Boughton, and first cousin to Sir Edward Montagu. He was appointed Lord Chief Baron 1676. Died 1707, aged 89. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-330" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-331" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>There is a token of the Pope’s Head tavern in Chancery Lane described in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Boyne’s Trade Tokens</i>, by Williamson, 1889, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 554. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-331" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-332" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The name Mary-le-bone has been corrupted from <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary-le-bourne, but this is a still further corruption, and an amazing instance of popular etymology. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-332" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-333" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir Sidney Montagu, brother of the first Earl of Manchester, and the father of “my Lord,” had married for his second wife one of the Isham family, of Lamport. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-333" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-334" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Long Reach, between Erith and Gravesend. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-334" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-335" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Vice-Admiral John Lawson, knighted by Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> in September, 1660. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-335" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-336" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Edmund Ibbott, <abbr>S.T.B.</abbr>, chaplain of the ship, in 1662 made rector of Deal. Died 1677. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-336" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-337" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Captain Roger Cuttance, commander of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Naseby</i>, afterwards the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Charles</i>. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-337" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-338" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A reach of the Thames near Tilbury. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-338" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-339" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“A small hole or port cut either in the deck or side of a ship, generally for ventilation. That in the deck is a small hatchway.”</p>
						<cite>Smyth’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sailor’s Word-Book</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-339" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-340" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Robin Clerke, Captain of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Speaker</i>, afterwards the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Mary</i>. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-340" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-341" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Bernard and Nicholas Pedley, re-elected in the next Parliament. The latter had been a Commissioner of the Wine Office. Sir Edward Montagu had set up Lord Mandeville, the Earl of Manchester’s eldest son, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Montagu, as candidates. See ante, March 14th. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-341" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-342" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir <abbr class="name">E.</abbr> Montagu’s flag was on board the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Naseby</i> when he went to the Sound in 1658. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-342" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-343" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hill, who was a neighbour of Pepys’s in Axe Yard, is mentioned again under date August 5th, 1660, when Pepys sat in his pew at <abbr>St.</abbr> Margaret’s, Westminster. <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-343" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-344" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Younger brother of Sir Gilbert Pickering, Bart, born 1618, and bred to the law; and in 1681 a resident in Lincoln’s Inn. He married Dorothy, one of the daughters of Sir John Weld of Arnolds, in Edmonton, Middlesex, and died in 1698, <abbr>s. p. s.</abbr>; his widow survived till December, 1707. Roger North (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of Lord Keeper Guildford</i>, 1742, <abbr>p.</abbr> 58) has drawn a very unfavourable picture of Edward Pickering, calling him a subtle fellow, a money-hunter, a great trifler, and avaricious, but withal a great pretender to Puritanism, frequenting the Rolls’ Chapel, and most busily writing the sermon in his hat, <em>that he might not be seen</em>. We learn from the same authority that Sir John Cutts of Childerley, having left his aunt, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Edward Pickering, an estate worth £300 per annum, for ninety-nine years, <em>if she should so long live</em>, her husband, who was the executor, erased from the will the words of reference to her life, with intention to possess himself of the property for the term, absolutely, which fraud being suspected, the question was tried in a court of law, and the jury without hesitation found Pickering the author of the erasure, before the publication of the will.—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-3.xhtml#noteref-344" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-345" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Edward Montagu, eldest son of Edward, second Lord Montagu of Boughton, killed in the action in Bergen, 1665. <a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-345" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-346" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This is the first mention in the Diary of Admiral (afterwards Sir William) Penn, with whom Pepys was subsequently so particularly intimate. At this time admirals were sometimes styled generals. William Penn was born at Bristol in 1621, of the ancient family of the Penns of Penn Lodge, Wilts. He was Captain at the age of twenty-one; Rear-Admiral of Ireland at twenty-three; Vice-Admiral of England and General in the first Dutch war, at thirty-two. He was subsequently <abbr>M.P.</abbr> for Weymouth, Governor of Kingsale, and Vice- Admiral of Munster. He was a highly successful commander, and in 1654 he obtained possession of Jamaica. He was appointed a Commissioner of the Navy in 1660, in which year he was knighted. After the Dutch fight in 1665, where he distinguished himself as second in command under the Duke of York, he took leave of the sea, but continued to act as a Commissioner for the Navy till 1669, when he retired to Wanstead, on account of his bodily infirmities, and dying there, September 16th, 1670, aged forty-nine, was buried in the church of <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary Redcliffe, in Bristol, where a monument to his memory was erected. <a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-346" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-347" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Gray’s Thurrock, a market town on the Thames, in the county of Essex. <a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-347" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-348" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Balthasar <abbr>St.</abbr> Michel, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Pepys’s brother. <a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-348" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-349" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><dfn>Reformado</dfn>, “a broken or disbanded officer.” Boyer translates “<i xml:lang="fr">Officier reformé</i>, a reformado.” See Diary, October 1st, 1660. <a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-349" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-350" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Stokes, or Stoakes, was captain of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Royal James</i>. He died at Portsmouth, February, 1664–65. <a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-350" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-351" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Bardsey Isle, in Pwllheli district, Carnarvon. It lies at the north-west extremity of Cardigan Bay, and is famous for oysters, lobsters, and white fish. <a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-351" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-352" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Probably Edward Pickering, see <a href="#note-344">note 344</a>. <a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-352" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-353" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“A vessel of the galliot order, equipped with two masts, <abbr>viz.</abbr>, the main and mizen masts, usually from 100 to 250 tons burden. Ketches were principally used as yachts for conveying great personages from one place to another.”</p>
						<cite>Smyth’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sailor’s Word-Book</i>, 1867</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-353" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-354" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The castles were Walmer, Sandgate, Sandwich, Deal, and Dover. <a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-354" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-355" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“A sort of chamber or apartment in a large ship of war, just before the great cabin. The floor of it is formed by the aftmost part of the quarter deck, and the roof of it by the poop: it is generally the habitation of the flag-captain.”</p>
						<cite>Smyth’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sailor’s Word-Book</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-355" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-356" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Charles, who succeeded his father as second Earl of Norwich. He had been banished eleven years before by the Parliament for heading an army, and keeping the town of Colchester for the use of the King. At his first coming he went to the Council of State, and had leave to remain in London, provided he did not disturb the peace of the nation.—Rugge’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diurnal</i>.—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-356" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-357" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The <abbr>Hon.</abbr> Robert Boyle, youngest son of Richard, first Earl of Cork. <a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-357" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-358" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Probably a miswriting for Sir John Boys, the celebrated Royalist commander, who was released from Dover Castle on February 23rd, 1659–60, having been imprisoned for petitioning for a free parliament. <a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-358" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-359" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“His Excellency had now dined at nine of the chief Halls; at every Hall there was after dinner a kind of stage-play, and many pretty conceits, and dancing and singing, and many shapes and ghosts, and the like, and all to please Lord Monk.”</p>
						<cite>Rugge’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diurnal</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-359" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-360" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The manner of the escape of John Lambert, out of the Tower, on the 11th <abbr>inst.</abbr>, as related by Rugge:⁠—“That about eight of the clock at night he escaped by a rope tied fast to his window, by which he slid down, and in each hand he had a handkerchief; and six men were ready to receive him, who had a barge to hasten him away. She who made the bed, being privy to his escape, that night, to blind the warder when he came to lock the chamber-door, went to bed, and possessed Colonel Lambert’s place, and put on his nightcap. So, when the said warder came to lock the door, according to his usual manner, he found the curtains drawn, and conceiving it to be Colonel John Lambert, he said, ‘Good night, my Lord.’ To which a seeming voice replied, and prevented all further jealousies. The next morning, on coming to unlock the door, and espying her face, he cried out, ‘In the name of God, Joan, what makes you here? Where is my Lord Lambert?’ She said, ‘He is gone; but I cannot tell whither.’ Whereupon he caused her to rise, and carried her before the officer in the Tower, and [she] was committed to custody. Some said that a lady knit for him a garter of silk, by which he was conveyed down, and that she received £100 for her pains.”⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-360" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-361" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Captain, afterwards Admiral Sir Thomas Teddiman. <a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-361" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-362" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Worcester</i> (formerly the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Dunkirk</i>) was a third-rate of forty-eight guns, built at Woolwich in 1651 by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Russell. <a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-362" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-363" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Coppin was captain of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Lambert</i>, afterwards the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Henrietta</i>. <a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-363" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-364" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir John Lawson (see ante, <a href="#note-52">note 52</a>). <a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-364" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-365" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir Richard Stayner, knighted and made a Vice-Admiral by Cromwell, 1657, and after the Restoration sent to command at Tangier till the Governor arrived. <a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-365" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-366" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>Sir Edward Montagu afterwards recommended the Duke of York as High Admiral, to give regular and lawful commissions to the Commanders of the Fleet, instead of those which they had received from Sir Edward himself, or from the Rump Parliament.</p>
						<cite>Kennett’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Register</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 163</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-366" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-367" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Thomas Wendy of Haselingfield. <a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-367" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-368" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Isaac Thornton of Smallwell. <a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-368" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-369" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>He had represented Cambridgeshire in the preceding Parliament. <a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-369" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-370" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Of Bonnington and Sandwich, Gentleman of the Privy-Chamber to Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. He defended Donnington Castle, Berkshire, for the King against Jeremiah Horton, 1644, and received an augmentation to his arms in consequence. <a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-370" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-371" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A Major Norwood had been Governor of Dunkirk; and a person of the same name occurs as one of the esquires of the body at the Coronation of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. Richard Norwood of Danes Court, in the Isle of Thanet, see December 1st, 1662.—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-371" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-372" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Brielle, or Den Briel, a seaport town in the province of South Holland. <a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-372" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-373" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Pepys’s guess at <abbr class="name">E.</abbr> Montagu’s business is confirmed by Clarendon’s account of his employment of him to negotiate with Lord Sandwich on behalf of the King. (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of the Rebellion</i>, book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xvi</span>)⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Notes and Queries</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">x</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 3⁠—<abbr class="name">M.</abbr> <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-373" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-374" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Allhallows the Great, a church in Upper Thames Street. The old church destroyed in the Great Fire was also known as “Allhallows in the Ropery.” <a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-374" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-375" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>As trustees for Sir Thomas Gresham, the founder of the Royal Exchange. <a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-375" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-376" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Paradox</i> was a sixth-rate of twelve guns. <a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-376" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-377" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>“The Blacksmith” was the same tune as “Green Sleeves.” The earliest known copy of “The Praise of the Blacksmith” is in “An Antidote against Melancholy,” 1661. See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Roxburghe Ballads</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Chappell, 1872, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 126. (Ballad Society.) <a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-377" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-378" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">London</i> was a second-rate of sixty-four guns, built at Chatham in 1657 by Captain Taylor. <a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-378" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-379" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Colonel Richard Ingoldsby had been Governor of Oxford under his kinsman Cromwell. He signed the warrant for the execution of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, but was pardoned for the service here mentioned, and made <abbr>K.B.</abbr> at the Coronation of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. He afterwards retired to his seat at Lethenborough, Bucks, and died 1685. He was buried in the church of Hartwell, near Aylesbury. <a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-379" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-380" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Edward, second Earl of Manchester, whose father, Henry, first earl, had been chosen Speaker of the House of Lords in 1641. <a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-380" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-381" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Ancestor of the Earls of Verulam. He was made Master of the Rolls, November following. Born 1594, and died December 31st, 1683. <a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-381" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-382" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>See ante, February 28th, 1659–60. <a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-382" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-383" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Of Easton Mauduit, <abbr>Bart.</abbr>, grandson to the Attorney-General of both his names. Died 1679. <a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-383" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-384" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Of Long Stanton, <abbr>co.</abbr> Cambridge, <abbr class="eoc">Bart.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-384" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-385" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Of Allerton Maleverer, Yorkshire, <abbr class="eoc">Bart.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-385" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-386" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The King arrived at Breda on the 14th April. Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Lower writes (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voiage and Residence of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> in Holland</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 5): “Many considerations obliged him to depart the territories under the obedience of the King of Spain in this conjuncture of affairs.” <a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-386" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-387" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>As there were several of this name it is impossible to say which <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pett is meant. <a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-387" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-388" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Captain Thomas Sparling, of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Assistance</i>. <a href="../text/chapter-4.xhtml#noteref-388" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-389" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>In 1656 was published “The Yellow Book, or a serious letter sent by a private Christian to the Lady Consideration the first of May 1656, which she is desired to communicate in Hide Park to the Gallants of the Times a little after sunset. Also a brief account of the names of some vain persons that intend to be there.” <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-389" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-390" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Nonsuch</i> was a fourth-rate of thirty-two guns, built at Deptford in 1646 by Peter Pett, <abbr class="eoc">jun.</abbr> The captain was John Parker. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-390" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-391" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Captain Henry Cuttance, of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Cheriton</i>, afterwards the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Speedwell</i>. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-391" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-392" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“His Majesty added thereunto an excellent Declaration for the safety and repose of those, who tortured in their consciences, for having partaken in the rebellion, might fear the punishment of it, and in that fear might oppose the tranquillity of the Estate, and the calling in of their lawful Prince. It is printed and published as well as the letter, but that shall not hinder me to say, that there was never seen a more perfect assemblage of all the most excellent natural qualities, and of all the venues, as well Royal as Christian, wherewith a great Prince may be endowed, than was found in those two wonderful productions.”</p>
						<cite>Sir William Lower’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Relation … of the Voiage and Residence which … Charles the <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> hath made in Holland</i>, Hague, 1660, folio, <abbr>p.</abbr> 3</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-392" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-393" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Of Pickering Lyth, in Yorkshire, <abbr>M.P.</abbr> for Scarborough; discharged from sitting in the House of Commons, July 21st, 1660. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-393" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-394" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Created Earl of Bath, 1661; son of Sir Bevil Grenville, killed at the battle of Lansdowne; he was, when a boy, left for dead on the field at the second battle of Newbury, and said to have been the only person entrusted by Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> and Monk in bringing about the Restoration. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-394" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-395" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“The picture of King Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> was often set up in houses, without the least molestation, whereas a while ago, it was almost a hanging matter so to do; but now the Rump Parliament was so hated and jeered at, that the butchers’ boys would say, ‘Will you buy any Parliament rumps and kidneys?’ And it was a very ordinary thing to see little children make a fire in the streets, and burn rumps.”</p>
						<cite>Rugge’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diurnal</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-395" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-396" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Charles, eldest son of Dudley, afterwards fourth Lord North. On the death of his father in 1677 he became fifth Lord North. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-396" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-397" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>“King Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> his Declaration to all his loving Subjects of the Kingdome of England, dated from his Court at Breda in Holland 4/14 of April, 1660, and read in Parliament with his Majesties Letter of the same date to his Excellence the <abbr>Ld. Gen.</abbr> Monck to be communicated to the <abbr>Ld.</abbr> President of the Council of State and to the Officers of the Army under his Command. London, Printed by <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Godbid for John Playford in the Temple, 1660.” 40, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 8. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-397" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-398" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Hayward was captain of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Plymouth</i>. Thomas Binns commanded the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Essex</i>. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-398" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-399" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>When only seventeen years old, Montagu had married Jemima, daughter of John Crew, created afterwards Baron Crew of Stene. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-399" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-400" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>See the letter printed in Lister’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of Lord Clarendon</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 404. It is dated 4th May. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-400" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-401" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Philip, fifth Earl of Pembroke, and second Earl of Montgomery, died 1669. Clarendon says, “This young earl’s affections were entire for his Majesty.” <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-401" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-402" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>William, second Earl of Salisbury. After Cromwell had put down the House of Peers, he was chosen a member of the House of Commons, and sat with them. Died 1668. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-402" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-403" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Schevingen, the port of the Hague. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-403" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-404" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Hellevoetsluis, in South Holland. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-404" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-405" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Thomas Clarges, physician to the army, created a baronet, 1674, died 1695. He had been previously knighted; his sister Anne married General Monk.</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“The Parliament also permitted General Monk to send <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Clarges, his brother-in-law, accompanied with some officers of the army, to assure his Majesty of the fidelity and obedience of the army, which had made publick and solemn protestations thereof, after the Letter and Declaration was communicated unto them by the General.”</p>
						<cite>Sir William Lower’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Relation … of the Voiage and Residence which … Charles the <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> hath made in Holland</i>, Hague, 1660, folio</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-405" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-406" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i xml:lang="es">Entendimiento</i>, Spanish: the understanding. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-406" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-407" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Kate Fenner married Anthony Joyce. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-407" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-408" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Third son of Spencer, Earl of Northampton, a Privy Councillor and Master of the Ordnance, <abbr>ob.</abbr> 1663, aged 39. When only eighteen years of age, he had charged with his gallant father at the battle of Edgehill. His mother was first cousin to George Villiers, Duke of Buckingham, and to John Ashburnham; and his great uncle, Sir Thomas Compton, had been the third husband of the Duke’s mother, Mary, Countess of Buckingham.—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-408" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-409" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Waistcloths are the painted canvas coverings of the hammocks which are stowed in the waist-nettings. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-409" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-410" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A set or company of musicians, an expression constantly used by old writers without any disparaging meaning. It is sometimes applied to voices as well as to instruments. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-410" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-411" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Henry, eldest son of Lord Bellasis, made <abbr>K.B.</abbr> at Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>’s coronation. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-411" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-412" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir Thomas Leventhorpe, <abbr>Bart.</abbr>, married Mary, daughter of Sir Capell Bedell, <abbr class="eoc">Bart.</abbr> Died 1671. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-412" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-413" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Colonel, afterwards Sir Philip Honywood, son of Robert Honywood of Charing, Kent. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-413" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-414" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Colonel Silas Titus, Gentleman of the Bedchamber to Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, author of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Killing no Murder</i>. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-414" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-415" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The jurats of the Cinque Ports answered to the aldermen of other towns. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-415" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-416" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir Peter Killigrew, Knight, of Arwenack, Cornwall, was known as “Peter the Post,” from the alacrity with which he despatched “like wild fire” all the messages and other commissions entrusted to him in the King’s cause. His son Peter, who succeeded his uncle as second baronet in 1665, was <abbr>M.P.</abbr> for Camelford in 1660. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-416" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-417" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Afterwards Sir William Sanderson, gentleman of the chamber, author of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Mary Queen of Scots, James <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, and Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></i> His wife, Dame Bridget, was mother of the maids. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-417" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-418" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Heneage Finch, second Earl of Winchelsea, constituted by General Monk Governor of Dover Castle, July, 1660; made Lord Lieutenant of Kent, and afterwards ambassador to Turkey. Died 1689. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-418" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-419" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir Edward Montagu’s eldest son, afterwards second Earl of Sandwich, called by Pepys “The child.” <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-419" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-420" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Maitland, second Earl, and afterwards created Marquis of March, Duke of Lauderdale, and Earl of Guilford (in England), and <abbr class="eoc">K.G.</abbr> He became sole Secretary of State for Scotland in 1661, and was a Gentleman of his Majesty’s Bedchamber, and died in 16S2, <abbr class="eoc">s.p.</abbr>—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-420" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-421" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“Ordered that General Montagu do observe the command of His Majesty for the disposing of the fleet, in order to His Majesty’s returning home to England to his kingly government: and that all proceedings in law be in His Majesty’s name.”</p>
						<cite>Rugge’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diurnal</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-421" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-422" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pitts was secretary to Sir <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Lawson, Vice-Admiral. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-422" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-423" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“Ordered that General Montagu do observe the command of His Majesty for the disposing of the fleet, in order to His Majesty’s returning home to England to his kingly government: and that all proceedings in law be in His Majesty’s name.”</p>
						<cite>Rugge’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diurnal</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-423" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-424" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Timothy Clarke, <abbr>M. D.</abbr>, one of the original Fellows of the Royal Society. He was appointed one of the physicians in ordinary to Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> on the death of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Quartermaine in 1667. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-424" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-425" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John, fourteenth Earl of Crauford, restored in 1661 to the office of High Treasurer of Scotland, which he had held eight years under Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>.—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-425" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-426" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>William, Lord Cavendish, afterwards fourth Earl and first Duke of Devonshire. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-426" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-427" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Robert and Edward Bertie, two of the surviving sons of Robert, first Earl of Lindsay, killed at Edgehill. Their mother was Elizabeth, only child of Edward, first Lord Montagu of Boughton; they were, therefore, nearly connected with Sir <abbr class="name">E.</abbr> Montagu, and with Pepys, in some degree.—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-427" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-428" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Probably Thomas Dalmahoy, who had married the Duchess Dowager of Hamilton: see (infra) Speaker Onslow’s note to Burnet. The husband of the loyal Duchess would be naturally one of the first to welcome the King; and Onslow says he was in the interest of the Duke of York:</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“Lord Middleton retired, after his disgrace, to the Friary, near Guildford, to one Dalmahoy there, a genteel, generous man, who was of Scotland: had been Gentleman of the Horse to William Duke of Hamilton (killed at the battle of Worcester); married that Duke's widow; and by her had this house, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> This man, Dalmahoy, being much in the interest of the Duke of York, and a man to be relied upon, and long a candidate for the town of Guildford, at the election of the Parliament after the Long one, in 1678, and being opposed, I think, by the famous Algernon Sidney, the Duke of York came from Windsor to Dalmahoy’s house, to countenance his election, and appeared for him in the open court, when the election was taken.”</p>
						<cite>Note to Burnet’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>O. T.</abbr></i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 350</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-428" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-429" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Timothy Clarke. See note the previous day. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-429" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-430" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Lark</i> carried ten guns and forty men. Its captain was Thomas Levidge. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-430" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-431" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Samuel Morland, son of the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Thomas Morland, of Sulhamstead Banister, near Reading, Berks, was born about 1625. He was educated at Winchester School, whence he removed to Magdalene College, Cambridge; admitted to a scholarship, July 8th, 1645; to a quinquennial fellowship, November 30th, 1649; and to a foundation fellowship, September 24th, 1651. One of the fellows who signed Pepys’s admission entry, October ist, 1650. He became afterwards one of Thurloe’s under-secretaries, and was employed in several embassies, particularly to the Vaudois, by Cromwell, whose interests he betrayed, by secretly communicating with Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. He published in 1658, in a folio volume, his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of the Evangelical Churches of the Valleys of Piemont</i>. He was knighted at Breda, and afterwards created a baronet. He was an ingenious mechanic, and made some improvements in the steam engine. At the Restoration he was made Master of Mechanics to Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, who presented him with a medal as an “honourable badge of his signal loyalty.” He subsequently received a pension of £400, but he sold it for ready money. He died December 30th, 1695, and was buried in Hammersmith church on the 6th of the following January. His <abbr>MSS.</abbr> are at Cambridge, in the Public Library.</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“We think to relate here, as a thing most remarkable that the same day <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Moorland, Chief Commissioner under <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thurlo, who was Secretary of Estate under Oliver Cromwell, his chief and most confident minister of his tyranny, arrived at Breda, where he brought divers letters and notes of most great importance, forasmuch as the King discovered there a part of the intricate plots of the interreign, and likewise the perfidiousness of some of those who owed him, without doubt, the greatest fidelity of the world. The King received him perfectly well, made him knight, and rendred him this publick testimony, that he had received most considerable services from him for some years past.”</p>
						<cite>Sir William Lower’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Relation … of the Voiage and Residence which … Charles the <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> hath made in Holland</i>, Hague, 1660, folio</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-431" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-432" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>In May, 1658, the old Union Jack (being the crosses of <abbr>St.</abbr> George and <abbr>St.</abbr> Andrew combined) was revived, with the Irish harp over the centre of the flag. This harp was taken off at the Restoration. (See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The National Flags of the Commonwealth</i>, by <abbr class="name">H. W.</abbr> Henfrey, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal"><abbr>Journ. Brit. Arch. Assoc.</abbr></i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxi</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 54.) The sign of the “Commonwealth Arms” was an uncommon one, but a token of one exists⁠—“Francis Wood at ye Commonwealth arms in Mary Maudlens” [<abbr>St.</abbr> Mary Magdalen, Old Fish Street]. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-432" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-433" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“A sort of cabin or cook-room, generally in the forepart, but sometimes near the stern of lighters and barges of burden.”</p>
						<cite>Smyth’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sailor’s Word-Book</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-433" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-434" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Elizabeth, daughter of James <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> and widow of Frederick, Elector Palatine and titular King of Bohemia. She was known as the “Queen of Hearts” and the “White Queen.” She is supposed to have married Lord Craven, and died February 12th, 1661–63. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-434" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-435" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Son of the Prince of Orange and Mary, eldest daughter of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>⁠—afterwards William <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. He was then in his tenth year, having been born in 1650. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-435" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-436" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Fowler, see ante, March 21st. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-436" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-437" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Prince of Orange, afterwards William <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-437" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-438" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Index Rhetoricus</i> of Thomas Farnaby was a book which went through several editions. The first was published at London by <abbr class="name">R.</abbr> Allot in 1633. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-438" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-439" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Thomas Case, born 1598, was a famous preacher and a zealous advocate for the Solemn League and Covenant, a member of the assembly of divines, and rector of <abbr>St.</abbr> Giles’s-in-the-Fields. He was one of the deputation to Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> at Breda, and appointed a royal chaplain. He was ejected by the Act of Uniformity, but remained in London after his ejection. Died May 30th, 1682. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-439" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-440" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This is somewhat different to the usual account of Morland’s connection with Sir Richard Willis. In the beginning of 1659 Cromwell, Thurloe, and Willis formed a plot to inveigle Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> into England and into the hands of his enemies. The plot was discussed in Thurloe’s office, and Morland, who pretended to be asleep, heard it and discovered it. Willis sent for Morland, and received him in a cellar. He said that one of them must have discovered the plot. He laid his hand upon the Bible and swore that he had not been the discoverer, calling upon Morland to do the same. Morland, with presence of mind, said he was ready to do so if Willis would give him a reason why he should suspect him. By this ready answer he is said to have escaped the ordeal (see Birch’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of Thurloe</i>). <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-440" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-441" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The admiral celebrated in Lord Dorset’s ballad, “To all you ladies now at land.”</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
						<p>
							<span>“Should foggy Opdam chance to know</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Our sad and dismal story;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The Dutch would scorn so weak a foe,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">And quit their fort at Goree</span>
							<br/>
							<span>For what resistance can they find</span>
							<br/>
							<span>From men who’ve left their hearts behind?”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-441" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-442" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Peter Pett succeeded his father, Phineas Pett, as Commissioner of the Navy at Chatham, in 1647; he was continued in his office after the Restoration, but in 1667, in consequence of the Dutch attack upon Chatham, he was superseded, sent to the Tower, and threatened with impeachment. The threat was not carried out, but he was never restored to office. Fuller observes that the mystery of shipwrights for some descents hath been preserved successively in families, “of which the Pettes of Chatham are of singular regard.”—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Worthies of England</i>. There is an interesting autobiographical memoir of Phineas Pett, in his own handwriting, in the British Museum (<abbr>Harl. MS.</abbr> 6279). Extracts from a copy of this <abbr>MS.</abbr> were printed in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Archæologia</i> (<abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>). <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-442" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-443" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Eldest son of Sir Gilbert Pickering, whom he succeeded in his titles and estates in 1668. His father had been an active Commonwealth man, and was one of the knights of the shire for the county of Northampton in 1656; he was also of Cromwell’s council, chamberlain of the court, and high steward of Westminster. Sir Gilbert Pickering’s petition being read, he was ordered to be excepted as to the penalties to be inflicted not reaching to life, by an act provided for that purpose.—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Commons’ Journals</i>; see June 19th, 1660.—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-443" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-444" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Andrew Marvell alludes to the poor condition, for clothes and money, in which the King was at this time, in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">A Historical Poem</i>:⁠—</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“At length, by wonderful impulse of fate,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The people call him back to help the State;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And what is more, they send him money, too,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And clothe him all from head to foot anew.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-444" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-445" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Mary, Princess of Orange. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-445" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-446" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>James’s patent was dated June 6th, 1660. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-446" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-447" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Edward Montagu, afterwards Lord Hinchinbroke. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-447" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-448" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>On January 29th, 1658, Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> entrusted the Great Seal to Sir Edward Hyde, with the title of Lord Chancellor, and in that character Sir Edward accompanied the King to England. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-448" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-449" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Thomas Fuller, born June, 1608; <abbr>D.D.</abbr> 1660; one of the most delightful writers in the English language; Chaplain to the King, Lecturer at the Savoy, Prebendary of Salisbury and Rector of Cranford. He died at his lodgings in Covent Garden, August 16th, 1661, and was buried at Cranford. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-449" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-450" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Henrietta Maria. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-450" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-451" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The House in the Wood (<i xml:lang="nl">Huis ten Bosch</i>) at the Hague is still a show place, and the picture described by Pepys can still be seen in the <i xml:lang="nl">Oranje Zaal</i> (Orange Hall). The hall was built by a Princess of Solms, grandmother of our William <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, and decorated with paintings in honour of her husband, Prince Frederick Henry of Orange. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-451" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-452" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Mary, Princess Royal, eldest daughter of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, and widow of William of Nassau, Prince of Orange. She was not supposed to be inconsolable, and scandal followed her at the court of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, where she died of smallpox, December 24th, 1660. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-452" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-453" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Voorhout is the principal street of the Hague, and it is lined with handsome trees. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-453" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-454" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Delft is about five miles from the Hague. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-454" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-455" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The <i xml:lang="nl">trekschuit</i> (drag-boat) along the canal is still described as an agreeable conveyance from Leyden to Delft. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-455" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-456" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Admiral Martin van Tromp’s monument here described is in the <i xml:lang="nl">Oude Kerk</i> {Old Church) at Delft. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-456" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-457" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The costly but clumsy monument erected by the United Provinces to the memory of William <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Prince of Orange (who was assassinated at Delft, 10th July, 1584), is in the so-called New Church at Delft. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-457" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-458" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Stadhuis is a fine building situated in the marketplace. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-458" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-459" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Afterwards Colonel Edward Harley, <abbr>M.P.</abbr> for Hereford, and Governor of Dunkirk; ancestor of the Earls of Oxford of that race, now extinct in the male line. He was afterwards made a Knight of the Bath at the Coronation of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-459" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-460" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Edmond Ibbott, made rector of Deal in 1662. See ante, March 25th. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-460" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-461" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Ackworth seems to have held some office in Deptford Yard, see January 14th, 1660–61. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-461" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-462" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Crambo is described as “a play at short verses in which a word is given, and the parties contend who can find most rhymes to it.” <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-462" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-463" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>There were several Pickerings, and it is not easy to say which of them Pepys would style “uncle.” <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-463" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-464" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><dfn>Month’s-mind</dfn>. An earnest desire or longing, explained as alluding to “a woman’s longing.” See Shakespeare, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Two Gentlemen of Verona</i>, act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> <abbr>sc.</abbr> 2: “I see you have a month’s mind to them.”⁠—<abbr class="name">M.</abbr> <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-464" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-465" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This is a somewhat late use of an expression which was once universal. It was formerly the custom for both sexes to sleep in bed without any nightlinen.</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“Who sees his true love in her <em>naked bed</em>,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Teaching the sheets a whiter hue than white.”</span>
						</p>
						<cite>Shakespeare, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Venus and Adonis</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Nares (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Glossary</i>) notes the expression so late as in the very odd novel by <abbr class="name">T.</abbr> Amory, called <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">John Bunde</i>, where a young lady declares, after an alarm, “that she would never go into <em>naked bed</em> on board ship again.” Octavo edition, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 90. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-465" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-466" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Apparently Mallows stands for <abbr>St.</abbr> Malo and Murlace for Morlaise. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-466" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-467" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir John Lenthall, who survived till 1681, was the only son of Speaker Lenthall, and Cromwell’s Governor of Windsor Castle. He had been knighted by the Protector in 1657; but is styled “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lenthall” in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Commons’ Journals of the House</i>, May 12th, 1660, where the proceedings alluded to by Pepys are fully detailed. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Hutchinson also gives an account of them, in her <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoirs of Colonel Hutchinson</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 367, <abbr>4to.</abbr> <abbr class="eoc">edit.</abbr> On the 22nd of May following, Lenthall lost his seat for Abingdon, the double return for that borough having been decided in favour of Sir John Stonehouse; probably the then recent offence which Lenthall had given to the House of Commons had more influence in the adverse issue of the petition than the actual merits of the case. Sir John Lenthall, of whom Pepys speaks, August 10th, 1663, was the brother to the Speaker. See that passage.—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-467" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-468" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Henry, Duke of Gloucester, the youngest child of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, born July 6th, 1640, who, with his sister Elizabeth, was allowed a meeting with his father on the night before the King’s execution. Burnet says: “He was active, and loved business; was apt to have particular friendships, and had an insinuating temper which was generally very acceptable. The King loved him much better than the Duke of York.” He died of smallpox at Whitehall, September 13th, 1660, and was buried in Henry <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>’s Chapel. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-468" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-469" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>William Coventry, to whom Pepys became so warmly attached afterwards, was the fourth son of Thomas, first Lord Coventry, the Lord Keeper. He was born in 1628, and entered at Queen’s College, Oxford, in 1642; after the Restoration he became private secretary to the Duke of York, his commission as Secretary to the Lord High Admiral not being conferred until 1664; elected <abbr>M.P.</abbr> for Great Yarmouth in 1661. In 1662 he was appointed an extra Commissioner of the Navy, an office he held until 1667; in 1665, knighted and sworn a Privy Councillor, and, in 1667, constituted a Commissioner of the Treasury; but, having been forbid the court on account of his challenging the Duke of Buckingham, he retired into the country, nor could he subsequently be prevailed upon to accept of any official employment. Burnet calls Sir William Coventry the best speaker in the House of Commons, and “a man of the finest and best temper that belonged to the court,” and Pepys never omits an opportunity of paying a tribute to his public and private worth. He died, 1686, of gout in the stomach. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-469" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-470" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Admiral Sir William Penn (see ante, April 4th). <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-470" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-471" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“About midnight arrived there <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing, who did the affairs of England to the Lords the Estates, in quality of Resident under Oliver Cromwell, and afterward under the pretended Parliament, which having changed the form of the government, after having cast forth the last Protector, had continued him in his imploiment, under the quality of Extraordinary Envoy. He began to have respect for the King’s person, when he knew that all England declared for a free parliament, and departed from Holland without order, as soon as he understood that there was nothing that could longer oppose the re- establishment of monarchal government, with a design to crave letters of recommendation to General Monk. This lord considered him, as well because of the birth of his wife, which is illustrious, as because Downing had expressed some respect for him in a time when that eminent person could not yet discover his intentions. He had his letters when he arrived at midnight at the house of the Spanish Embassador, as we have said. He presented them forthwith to the King, who arose from table a while after, read the letters, receiv’d the submissions of Downing, and granted him the pardon and grace which he asked for him to whom he could deny nothing. Some daies after the King knighted him, and would it should be believed, that the strong aversions which this minister of the Protector had made appear against him on all occasions, and with all sorts of persons indifferently, even a few daies before the publick and general declaration of all England, proceeded not from any evil intention, but only from a deep dissimulation, wherewith he was constrained to cover his true sentiments, for fear to prejudice the affairs of his Majesty.”</p>
						<cite>Sir William Lower’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Relation … of the Voiage and Residence which … Charles the <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> hath made in Holland</i>, Hague, 1660, folio, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 72⁠–⁠73</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-471" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-472" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Otte Krag was one of the two extraordinary ambassadors from the King of Denmark to Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> at the Hague. See Lower’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Voiage and Residence of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> in Holland</i>, 1660, <abbr>p.</abbr> 41. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-472" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-473" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>William Quartermaine, <abbr>M.D.</abbr>, matriculated as member of Brasenose College, Oxford, and afterwards removed to Pembroke College. He was appointed one of the physicians in ordinary to Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, and died in June, 1667. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-473" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-474" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Marmaduke, fifth son of Conyers, Lord Darcy, one of the companions of Charles’s exile, whom the King was wont to call “’Duke Darcey,” and he is so styled in Charles’s narrative of his escape, as given to Pepys. On the pavement in the south aisle of <abbr>St.</abbr> George’s Chapel, Windsor, is the following inscription:</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“Here lyeth the body of the Honourable Marmaduke Darcy, <abbr>Esq.</abbr>, brother to the Earl of Holderness, first gentleman usher of the privy-chamber to His Majesty, who died in this castle on Sunday, the 3d of July, in the seventy-third year of his age, <abbr class="era">A.D.</abbr> 1687.”</p>
						<cite>Pote’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Windsor</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 365</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-474" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-475" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Naseby</i> now no longer England’s shame,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But better to be lost in <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Charles</i> his name.”</span>
						</p>
						<cite>Dryden, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Astræa Redux</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Another <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Charles</i> was built at Deptford in 1667 by <abbr class="name">Jo.</abbr> Shish. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-475" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-476" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Richard</i> was a second-rate of seventy guns, built at Woolwich in 1658 by Christopher Pett. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-476" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-477" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Speaker</i> was a third-rate of fifty-two guns, built at Woolwich in 1649 by Christopher Pett. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-477" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-478" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Henry</i> then <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Dunbar</i>, was a second-rate of sixty-four guns, built at Deptford in 1656 by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Callis. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-478" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-479" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Happy Return</i>, then the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Winsley</i>, was built at Yarmouth in 1654 by Edgar; it was a fourth-rate of forty-six guns. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-479" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-480" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Richmond</i>, then the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Wakefield</i>, was built at Portsmouth in 1655 by Sir <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Tippets; it was a fifth-rate of twenty-six guns. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-480" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-481" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Henrietta</i>, then the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Lambert</i>, was built at Horslydown in 1653–4 by Bright; it was a third-rate of fifty guns. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-481" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-482" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Speedwell</i>, then the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Cheriton</i>, was a fifth-rate of twenty guns, built at Deptford in 1655 by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Callis. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-482" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-483" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Success</i>, then the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Bradford</i>, was a fifth-rate built at Chatham in 1657 by Captain Taylor. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-483" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-484" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>For the King’s own account of his escape dictated to Pepys, see “Boscobel” (Bohn’s “Standard Library”). <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-484" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-485" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This was at Brighton. The inn was the “George,” and the innkeeper was named Smith. Charles related this circumstance again to Pepys in October, 1680. He then said, “And here also I ran into another very great danger, as being confident I was known by the master of the inn; for, as I was standing after supper by the fireside, leaning my hand upon a chair, and all the rest of the company being gone into another room, the master of the inn came in and fell a-talking with me, and just as he was looking about, and saw there was nobody in the room, he upon a sudden kissed my hand that was upon the back of the chair, and said to me, ‘God bless you wheresoever you go! I do not doubt before I die, but to be a lord, and my wife a lady.’ So I laughed, and went away into the next room.” <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-485" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-486" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>On Saturday, October 11th, 1651, Colonel Gunter made an agreement at Chichester with Nicholas Tettersell, through Francis Mansell (a French merchant), to have Tettersell’s vessel ready at an hour’s warning. Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, in his narrative dictated to Pepys in 1680, said, “We went to a place, four miles off Shoreham, called Brighthelmstone, where we were to meet with the master of the ship, as thinking it more convenient to meet there than just at Shoreham, where the ship was. So when we came to the inn at Brighthelmstone we met with one, the merchant [Francis Mansell] who had hired the vessel, in company with her master [Tettersell], the merchant only knowing me, as having hired her only to carry over a person of quality that was escaped from the battle of Worcester without naming anybody.”</p>
					<p>The boat was supposed to be bound for Poole, but Charles says in his narrative: “As we were sailing the master came to me, and desired me that I would persuade his men to use their best endeavours with him to get him to set us on shore in France, the better to cover him from any suspicion thereof, upon which I went to the men, which were four and a boy.”</p>
					<p>After the Restoration Mansell was granted a pension of £200 a year, and Tettersell one of £100 a year. (See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Captain Nicholas Tettersell and the Escape of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span></i>, by <abbr class="name">F. E.</abbr> Sawyer, <abbr>F.S.A.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Sussex Archaeological Collections</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 81⁠–⁠104). <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-486" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-487" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A mistake for Lord Berkeley of Berkeley, who had been deputed, with Lord Middlesex and four other Peers, by the House of Lords to present an address of congratulation to the King.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-487" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-488" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Lionel Cranfield, third and last Earl of Middlesex. Died 1674, when the title became extinct. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-488" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-489" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>Canons, canions, or cannions. Thus defined in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Kersey’s Dictionary</i>: “Cannions, boot hose tops; an old-fashioned ornament for the legs.” That is to say, a particular addition to breeches. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Coles</i> says, “Cannions, Perizomata.” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Cotgrave</i>, “<i xml:lang="fr">Canons de chausses.</i>” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Minshew</i> says,"<i xml:lang="fr">On les appelle ainsi pourceque</i>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, because they are like cannons of artillery, or cans, or pots.”</p>
						<cite>Nares, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Glossary</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>—<abbr class="name">M.</abbr> <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-489" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-490" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Earle, born about 1601; appointed in 1643 one of the Westminster Assembly of Divines, but his principles did not allow him to act. He accompanied Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> when he was obliged to fly from England. Dean of Westminster at the Restoration, Bishop of Worcester, November 30th, 1662, and translated to Salisbury, September 28th, 1663. He was tender to the Nonconformists, and Baxter wrote of him, “O that they were all such!” Author of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Microcosmography</i>. Died November 17th, 1665, and was buried in the chapel of Merton College, of which he had been a Fellow. Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> had the highest esteem for him. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-490" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-491" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Denzil Holles, second son of John, first Earl of Clare, born at Houghton, Notts, in 1597. He was one of the five members charged with high treason by Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> in 1641. He was a Presbyterian, and one of the Commissioners sent by Parliament to wait on Charles <span epub:type="z3998:Roman">II</span> at the Hague. Sir William Lower, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Relation</i>, 1660, writes: “All agreed that never person spake with more affection nor expressed himself in better terms than <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Denzil Hollis, who was orator for the Deputies of the Lower House, to whom those of London were joined.” He was created Baron Holles on April 20th, 1661, on the occasion of the coronation of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:Roman">II</span> <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-491" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-492" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Charles Scarburgh, <abbr>M.D.</abbr>, an eminent physician who suffered for the royal cause during the Civil Wars. He was born in London, and educated at <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul’s School and Caius College, Cambridge. He was ejected from his fellowship at Caius, and withdrew to Oxford. He entered himself at Merton College, then presided over by Harvey, with whom he formed a lifelong friendship. He was knighted by Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> in 1669, and attended the King in his last illness. He was also physician to James <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> and to William <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, and died February 26th, 1693⁠–⁠4. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-492" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-493" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Stephen Fox, born 1627, and said to have been a choirboy in Salisbury Cathedral. He was the first person to announce the death of Cromwell to Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, and at the Restoration he was made Clerk of the Green Cloth, and afterwards Paymaster of the Forces. He was knighted in 1665. He married Elizabeth, daughter of William Whittle of Lancashire. (See June 25th, 1660.) Fox died in 1716. His sons Stephen and Henry were created respectively Earl of Ilchester and Lord Holland. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-493" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-494" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Thomas Killigrew, fourth son of Sir Robert Killigrew of Hanworth, Middlesex, page of honour to Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, and groom of the bedchamber to Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, whose fortunes he had followed. He was Resident for the King at Venice, 1650; a great favourite with his master on account of his uncommon vein of humour, and author of several plays. He was born in the parish of <abbr>St.</abbr> Margaret, Lothbury, February 7th, 1611–12, and died March, 1682–3, being buried in Westminster Abbey. He married twice: 1, June 29th, 1636, Cicely, daughter of Sir James Crofts of Saxham, <abbr>co.</abbr> Suffolk, maid of honour to Queen Henrietta Maria (she died January 1st, 1637–8); 2, January 28th, 1654–5, Charlotte, daughter of John de Hesse (she died at the Hague in 1716). <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-494" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-495" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This right of purveyance was abolished in Charles’s reign. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-495" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-496" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Late the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Naseby</i>. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-496" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-497" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>’s love of dogs is well known, but it is not so well known that his dogs were continually being stolen from him. In the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Mercurius Publicus</i>, June 28-July 5, 1660, is the following advertisement, apparently drawn up by the King himself: “We must call upon you again for a Black Dog between a greyhound and a spaniel, no white about him, onely a streak on his brest, and his tayl a little bobbed. It is His Majesties own Dog, and doubtless was stoln, for the dog was not born nor bred in England, and would never forsake His master. Whoesoever findes him may acquaint any at Whitehal for the Dog was better known at Court, than those who stole him. Will they never leave robbing his Majesty! Must he not keep a Dog? This dog’s place (though better than some imagine) is the only place which nobody offers to beg.” (Quoted in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Notes and Queries</i>, 7th <abbr>S.</abbr>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> 26, where are printed two other advertisements of Charles’s lost dogs.) <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-497" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-498" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Clarendon describes William Batten as an obscure fellow, and, although unknown to the service, a good seaman, who was in 1642 made Surveyor to the Navy; in which employ he evinced great animosity against the King. The following year, while Vice-Admiral to the Earl of Warwick, he chased a Dutch man-of-war into Burlington Bay, knowing that Queen Henrietta Maria was on board; and then, learning that she had landed and was lodged on the quay, he fired above a hundred shot upon the house, some of which passing through her majesty’s chamber, she was obliged, though indisposed, to retire for safety into the open fields. This act, brutal as it was, found favour with the Parliament. But Batten became afterwards discontented; and, when a portion of the fleet revolted, he carried the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Constant Warwick</i>, one of the best ships in the Parliament navy, over into Holland, with several seamen of note. For this act of treachery he was knighted and made a Rear-Admiral by Prince Charles. We hear no more of Batten till the Restoration, when he became a Commissioner of the Navy, and was soon after <abbr>M.P.</abbr> for Rochester. See an account of his second wife, in note to November 24th, 1660, and of his illness and death, October 5th, 1667. He had a son, Benjamin, and a daughter, Martha, by his first wife.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-498" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-499" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Edward Walker was knighted February 2nd, 1644⁠–⁠5, and on the 24th of the same month was sworn in as Garter King at Arms. He adhered to the cause of the king, and published <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Iter Carolinum</i>, being a succinct account of the necessitated marches, retreats, and sufferings of his Majesty King Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I,</span> from <abbr>Jan.</abbr> 10, 1641, to the time of his death in 1648, collected by a daily attendant upon his sacred Majesty during all that time: He joined Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> in exile, and received the reward of his loyalty at the Restoration. He died at Whitehall, February 19th, 1676⁠–⁠7, and was buried at Stratford-on-Avon, his daughter having married Sir John Clepton of that place. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-499" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-500" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“His Majesty put the George on his Excellency, and the two Dukes put on the Garter. The Princes thus honoured the Lord-General for the restoration of that lawful family.”</p>
						<cite>Rugge’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diurnal</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-500" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-501" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir George Villiers received the Garter in 1616. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-501" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-502" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hetley died in the following year, see January 19th, 1660–61. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-502" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-503" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The gold ducat is valued at about 9<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> 6<abbr class="currency">d.</abbr>, and the silver at 3<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> 4<abbr class="currency eoc">d.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-503" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-504" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The spire of <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul’s (which was 208 feet high) was injured by fire in 1561, and taken down soon afterwards. The height of the remaining tower was 285 feet. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-504" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-505" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Probably a book on <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul’s in the possession of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shepley. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-505" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-506" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“Divers maidens, in behalf of themselves and others, presented a petition to the Lord Mayor of London, wherein they pray his Lordship to grant them leave and liberty to meet His Majesty on the day of his passing through the city; and if their petition be granted, that they will all be clad in white waistcoats and crimson petticoats, and other ornaments of triumph and rejoicing.”</p>
						<cite>Rugge’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diurnal</i>, May, 1660</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-506" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-507" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Probably Henry Lawes, although nothing is known of this song. The late <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Hueffer wrote, “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">R.</abbr> Lane Poole, of the musical department of the British Museum, informs me that he has in vain searched for it amongst the <abbr>MS.</abbr> and printed collections of the Museum.”—Hueffer’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Italian and other Studies</i>, 1883, <abbr>p.</abbr> 290. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-507" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-508" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Young Edward Montagu. <a href="../text/chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-508" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-509" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Foreign coins were in frequent use at this time. A Proclamation, January 29th, 1660⁠–⁠61, declared certain foreign gold and silver coins to be current at certain rates. The rate of the ducatoon was at 5<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> 9<abbr class="currency eoc">d.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-509" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-510" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>12 <abbr>Car.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <abbr>cap.</abbr> 14, “An Act for a perpetual Anniversary Thanksgiving on the nine-and-twentieth day of May.” <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-510" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-511" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>One only of these two was elected, for Bullen Reymes became <abbr>M.P.</abbr> for Weymouth on June 22nd. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-511" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-512" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The King’s “Proclamation against vicious, debauched, and prophane Persons” is dated May 30th. It is printed in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Somers’ Tracts</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> 1812, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 423. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-512" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-513" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>“Help, help, O help, Divinity of Love,” by Henry Lawes, printed in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Second Book of Ayres and Dialogues</i>. London (Playford), 1655. It is entitled “A Storme.” <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-513" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-514" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><dfn>Cittern</dfn> (cither), a musical instrument having wire strings, sounded with a plectrum. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-514" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-515" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Symballs, <abbr>i.e.</abbr> cymbals. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-515" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-516" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>In the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Notices of Popular Histories</i>, printed for the Percy Society, there is a curious woodcut representing the interior of a barber’s shop, in which, according to the old custom, the person waiting to be shaved is playing on the “ghittern” till his turn arrives. Decker also mentions a “barber’s cittern,” for every serving-man to play upon. This is no doubt “the barber’s music” with which Lord Sandwich entertained himself.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-516" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-517" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Robert Pepys of Brampton, eldest son of Thomas Pepys the red, and brother of Samuel’s father. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-517" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-518" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Edmund Calamy, <abbr>D.D.</abbr>, the celebrated Nonconformist divine, born February, 1600, appointed Chaplain to Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, 1660. He refused the bishopric of Lichfield which was offered to him. Died October 29th, 1666. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-518" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-519" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The names of the Commissioners were⁠—Sir Edward Hyde, afterwards Earl of Clarendon, General Monk, Thomas, Earl of Southampton, John, Lord Robartes, Thomas, Lord Colepeper, Sir Edward Montagu, with Sir Edward Nicholas and Sir William Morrice as principal Secretaries of State. The patents are dated June 19th, 1660. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-519" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-520" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The duty of the Master of the Wardrobe was to provide “proper furniture for coronations, marriages, and funerals” of the sovereign and royal family, “cloaths of state, beds, hangings, and other necessaries for the houses of foreign ambassadors, cloaths of state for Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, Prince of Wales, and ambassadors abroad,” as also to provide robes for Ministers of State, Knights of the Garter, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> The last Master of the Wardrobe was Ralph, Duke of Montague, who died 1709. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-520" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-521" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Duke of York and Duke of Gloucester. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-521" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-522" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Epicene, or the Silent Woman</i>, a comedy, by Ben Jonson. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-522" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-523" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Arthur Annesley, afterwards second Viscount Valentia, born July 10th, 1614. He had been chosen President of the Council of State in February, 1660. He was a Parliamentarian as long as that cause was in the ascendant, but was instrumental in the restoration of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, for which service he was amply rewarded. He was Treasurer of the Navy from 1666 to 1668, and held the office of Lord Privy Seal from 1672 to 1682. Created Earl of Anglesea, 1661. He wrote several books, and died April 26th, 1686. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-523" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-524" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Lincoln’s Inn Gardens were originally known as Coneygarth, from the rabbits which burrowed there. Ben Jonson mentions them:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“The walks of Lincoln’s Inn</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Under the Elms.”</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Devil is an Ass</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-524" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-525" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Dorset House, in Salisbury Court, Fleet Street, at this time occupied by the Chancellor, once the residence of the Bishops of Salisbury, one of whom (Jewel) alienated it to the Sackville family. The house being afterwards pulled down, a theatre was built on its site, in which the Duke of York’s troop performed. The name is still preserved in Dorset Street. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-525" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-526" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>William Faithorne the elder, engraver and portrait painter, born in London in 1616. On the outbreak of the Civil War he took up arms for the King, and was confined for a time in Aldersgate as a prisoner of war. He was banished for refusing to take the oath to Oliver Cromwell, but obtained permission to return to England in 1650, when he settled at the sign of the Drake, outside Temple Bar. About 1680 he went to Printing House Yard, Blackfriars, and died May, 1691. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-526" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-527" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir George Carteret had been appointed Treasurer of the Navy at the Restoration in succession to Richard Hutchinson. See post, July 3rd, 1660. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-527" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-528" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>It was customary to use carpets as table cloths. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-528" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-529" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Elizabeth Montagu, sister to the Earl of Sandwich, who had married Sir Gilbert Pickering, <abbr>Bart.</abbr>, of Nova Scotia, and of Tichmersh, <abbr>co.</abbr> Northampton. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-529" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-530" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>There was another Bull Head at Charing Cross. There were several Brewer’s Yards in London, but this was probably the one on the south side of the Strand, near Hungerford Market; and the Bull Head tavern was doubtless the one at Charing Cross. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-530" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-531" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The house attached to the office of the Master of the Wardrobe was near Puddle Wharf, Blackfriars. It was built by Sir John Beauchamp (<abbr>d.</abbr> 1359), and his executors sold it to Edward <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. When Stow drew up his Survey, Sir John Fortescue was lodged in the house as Master of the Wardrobe. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-531" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-532" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Sarah, Lord Sandwich’s housekeeper. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-532" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-533" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Afterwards Sir Robert Holmes. He is styled “Major,” although in the navy. Thus Lord Sandwich and Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Penn were called “Generals;” see also January 6th, 1661–2. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-533" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-534" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>All organs were removed from churches by an ordinance dated 1644. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-534" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-535" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Frances Butler, sister to <abbr>Mons.</abbr> L'Impertinent; see February 17th, 1659–60. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-535" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-536" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The old hall of the Trinity House was at Deptford. The present building on Tower Hill was erected 1793–95. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-536" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-537" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The letters patent appointing Pepys to the office of Clerk of the Acts is dated July 13th, 1660. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-537" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-538" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Thomas Elborough was one of Pepys’s schoolfellows, and afterwards curate of <abbr>St.</abbr> Lawrence Poultney. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-538" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-539" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Baynard’s Castle, Thames Street, was garrisoned by the Parliament in 1648. It was destroyed in the Great Fire. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-539" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-540" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The <abbr>Hon.</abbr> George Montagu of Horton, <abbr>co.</abbr> Northampton, was elected <abbr>M.P.</abbr> for Dover, August 16th, 1660, in place of the Earl of Sandwich. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-540" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-541" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Whence it would go by water carriage. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-541" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-542" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>At the King’s Head there was a half-crown ordinary. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-542" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-543" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>William Swan is called a fanatic and a very rogue in other parts of the Diary. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-543" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-544" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Roger Boyle, fifth son of Richard, Earl of Cork, born April 25th, 1621 and at the age of seven created Lord Broghill. He was created Earl of Orrery in 1660. Died October 16th, 1679. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-544" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-545" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Colonel John Jones was <abbr>M.P.</abbr> for the City of London in the Parliament summoned to meet May 8th, 1661. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-545" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-546" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>See ante, January 17th, 1660. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-546" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-547" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A sweet drink which still survives in pharmacy, and the name is used in the United States for a special drink called mint julep. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-547" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-548" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Anne Clarges, Lady Monk, and Duchess of Albemarle. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-548" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-549" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This ceremony is usually traced to Edward the Confessor, but there is no direct evidence of the early Norman kings having touched for the evil. Sir John Fortescue, in his defence of the House of Lancaster against that of York, argued that the crown could not descend to a female, because the Queen is not qualified by the form of anointing her, used at the coronation, to cure the disease called the King’s evil. Burn asserts, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Parish Registers</i>, 1862, <abbr>p.</abbr> 179, that “between 1660 and 1682, 92,107 persons were touched for the evil.” Everyone coming to the court for that purpose, brought a certificate signed by the minister and churchwardens, that he had not at any time been touched by His Majesty. The practice was supposed to have expired with the Stuarts, but the point being disputed, reference was made to the library of the Duke of Sussex, and four several Oxford editions of the Book of Common Prayer were found, all printed after the accession of the house of Hanover, and all containing, as an integral part of the service, “The Office for the Healing.” The stamp of gold with which the King crossed the sore of the sick person was called an angel, and of the value of ten shillings. It had a hole bored through it, through which a ribbon was drawn, and the angel was hanged about the patient’s neck till the cure was perfected. The stamp has the impression of <abbr>St.</abbr> Michael the Archangel on one side, and a ship in full sail on the other. “My Lord Anglesey had a daughter cured of the King’s evil with three others on Tuesday.”⁠—<abbr>MS.</abbr> Letter of William Greenhill to Lady Bacon, dated December 31st, 1629, preserved at Audley End. Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> “touched” before he came to the throne. “It is certain that the King hath very often touched the sick, as well at Breda, where he touched 260 from Saturday the 17 of April to Sunday the 23 of May, as at Bruges and Bruxels, during the residence he made there; and the English assure … it was not without success, since it was the experience that drew thither every day, a great number of those diseased even from the most remote provinces of Germany.”⁠—Sir William Lower’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">Relation of the Voiage and Residence which Charles the <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> hath made in Holland</i>, Hague, 1660, <abbr>p.</abbr> 78. Sir William Lower gives a long account of the touching for the evil by Charles before the Restoration. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-549" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-550" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Frederic de Friesendorff, ambassador from Sweden to Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, who created him a baronet, 1661. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-550" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-551" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>An angelique is described as a species of guitar in Murray’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">New English Dictionary</i>, and this passage from the Diary is given as a quotation. The word appears as angelot in Phillips’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">English Dictionary</i> (1678), and is used in Browning’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Sordello</i>, as a “plaything of page or girl.” <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-551" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-552" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Alderman Edward Backwell, an eminent banker and goldsmith, who is frequently mentioned in the Diary. His shop was in Lombard Street. He was ruined by the closing of the Exchequer by Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> in 1672. The crown then owed him £295,994 16<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> 6<abbr class="currency">d.</abbr>, in lieu of which the King gave him an annuity of £17,759 13<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> 8<abbr class="currency eoc">d.</abbr> Backwell retired into Holland after the closing of the Exchequer, and died there in 1679. See Hilton Price’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Handbook of London Bankers</i>, 1876. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-552" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-553" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Thomas Turner (or Tourner) was General Clerk at the Navy Office, and on June 30th he offered Pepys £150 to be made joint Clerk of the Acts with him. In a list of the Admiralty officers just before the King came in, preserved in the British Museum, there occur, Richard Hutchinson; Treasury of the Navy, salary £1,500; Thomas Tourner, General Clerk, for himself and clerk, £100. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-553" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-554" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Elizabeth, daughter of William Whittle of Lancashire, married to <abbr>Mr.</abbr>, afterwards Sir Stephen Fox. See <a href="#note-493">note 493</a>. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-554" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-555" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir Edward Nicholas, Secretary of State to Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> He was dismissed from his office through the intrigues of Lady Castlemaine in 1663. He died 1669, aged seventy-seven. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-555" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-556" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Montagu changed his mind, and ultimately took his title from the town of Sandwich, leaving that of Portsmouth for the use of a King’s mistress. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-556" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-557" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>There is a token of “Thomas Darling at the Three Tuns neare Charing Cross.” See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Boyne’s Trade Tokens</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 557. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-557" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-558" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Puddlewharf was at the foot of <abbr>St.</abbr> Andrew’s Hill, Upper Thames Street, Blackfriars. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-558" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-559" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The letters patent, dated July 13th, 12 Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, recite and revoke letters patent of February 16th, 14 Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, whereby the office of Clerk of the Ships had been given to Dennis Fleming and <em>Thomas Barlow</em>, or the survivor. <abbr class="name">D. F.</abbr> was then dead, but <abbr class="name">T. B.</abbr> living, and Samuel Pepys was appointed in his room, at a salary of £33 6<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> 8<abbr class="currency">d.</abbr> per annum, with 3<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> 4<abbr class="currency">d.</abbr> for each day employed in travelling, and £6 per annum for boathire, and all fees due. This salary was only the ancient “fee out of the Exchequer,” which had been attached to the office for more than a century. Pepys’s salary had been previously fixed at £350 a year. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-559" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-560" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A token of William Burges, at the Swan at Dowgate Conduit, 1668, is described in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Boyne’s Trade Tokens</i>, by Williamson, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 1889, <abbr>p.</abbr> 583. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-560" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-561" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir Thomas Ingram was appointed Commissioner for Tangier. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-561" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-562" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Matthew Wren, born 1585, successively Bishop of Hereford, Norwich, and Ely. At the commencement of the Rebellion he was sent to the Tower, and remained a prisoner there eighteen years. Died April 24th, 1667. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-562" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-563" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>“A Proclamation for setting apart a day of Solemn and Publick Thanksgiving throughout the whole Kingdom,” dated June 5th, 1660. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-563" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-564" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Clothworkers’ Hall, in Mincing Lane. The original Hall was burned in the Great Fire. It will be seen from this entry that ladies were admitted to the dinners. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-564" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-565" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr>, afterwards Sir Francis Chaplin, from Bury <abbr>St.</abbr> Edmund’s, Alderman of Vintry Ward and Clothworker. He was Sheriff in 1668, and Lord Mayor in 1677. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-565" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-566" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This must either have been in Davenant’s <i epub:type="se:name.music.opera">Siege of Rhodes</i>, acted at Rutland House in 1656, or in the same author’s <i epub:type="se:name.music.opera">Cruelty of the Spaniards in Peru</i>, acted at the Cockpit in 1658. It is unfortunate that the Diarist does not tell us who it was that sang behind the scenes. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-566" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-567" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Dennis Gauden, Victualler to the Navy, subsequently knighted while sheriff of London: the large house at Clapham, in which Pepys died, was built by him, and intended as a palace for the Bishops of Winchester; his brother, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> John Gauden, then expecting to be translated from Exeter to that See, but he was promoted to Worcester. Sir Dennis was ultimately ruined, and his villa purchased by William Hewer. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-567" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-568" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Daniel Rawlinson kept the Mitre in Fenchurch Street, and there is a farthing token of his extant, “At the Mitetr in Fenchurch Streete, <abbr class="name">D. M. R.</abbr>” The initials stand for Daniel and Margaret Rawlinson (see <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Boyne’s Trade Tokens</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Williamson, <abbr>vol</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 1889, <abbr>p.</abbr> 595) In <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reliquiæ Hearnianæ</i> (<abbr>ed.</abbr> Bliss, 1869, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 39) is the following extract from Thomas Rawlinson’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Note Book <abbr>R.</abbr></i>: “Of Daniel Rawlinson, my grandfather, who kept the Mitre tavern in Fenchurch Street, and of whose being sequestred in the Rump time I have heard much, the Whiggs tell this, that upon the king’s murder he hung his signe in mourning. He certainly judged right. The honour of the Mitre was much eclipsed through the loss of so good a parent of the church of England. These rogues say, this endeared him so much to the churchmen that he soon throve amain and got a good estate.” <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Rawlinson died of the plague (see August 9th, 1666), and the house was burnt in the Great Fire. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rawlinson rebuilt the Mitre, and he had the panels of the great room painted with allegorical figures by Isaac Fuller. Daniel was father of Sir Thomas Rawlinson, of whom Thomas Hearne writes (October 1st, 1705): “Sir Thomas Rawlinson is chosen Lord Mayor of London for y<sup>e</sup> ensueing notwithstanding the great opposition of y<sup>e</sup> Whigg party” (Hearne’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Collections</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Doble, 1885, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 51). The well-known antiquaries, Thomas and Richard Rawlinson, sons of Sir Thomas, were therefore grandsons of Daniel. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-568" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-569" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Edith Pepys, daughter of Samuel Pepys of Steeple Bumsted (died 1665), married Thomas Wight of Denston, <abbr>co.</abbr> Suffolk. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-569" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-570" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Jane Wayneman. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-570" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-571" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir Geoffrey Palmer, Attorney-General, and Chief Justice of Chester, 1660; created a baronet, 1661. Died 1670. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-571" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-572" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir John Grenville was a cousin of General Monk, and for his services in the cause of the Restoration was created Lord Grenville of Kilkhampton and Biddeford, Viscount Grenville of Lansdown, and Earl of Bath, April 20th, 1661. Died 1701. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-572" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-573" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir Richard Fanshawe, knight and baronet, born at Ware Park, <abbr>Herts.</abbr> 1608, secretary to Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> at Breda, and after the Restoration <abbr>M.P.</abbr> for Cambridge. He negotiated the marriage with Catherine of Braganza. He was a good linguist, and “gave our language,” says Campbell, “some of its earliest and most important translations from modern literature.” He was appointed ambassador to Spain in 1664, and died at Madrid, 1666. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-573" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-574" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Thomas Barlow was originally in the service of Algernon, Earl of Northumberland, and was appointed by him Muster Master of the Fleet under his command in 1636. He was appointed in 1638 joint Clerk of the Acts (with Dennis Fleming). <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-574" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-575" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Algernon Percy, tenth Earl of Northumberland, Lord High Admiral to Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-575" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-576" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Thomas De Critz was Serjeant Painter to Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, and some account of him is given in Walpole’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Anecdotes of Painting</i>. This <abbr>Mr.</abbr> De Cretz, who was probably his son, was a copier of pictures. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-576" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-577" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>William Wayneman was constantly getting into trouble, and Pepys had to cane him. He was dismissed on July 7th, 1663. <a href="../text/chapter-6.xhtml#noteref-577" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-578" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><dfn>Camlet</dfn> was a mixed stuff of wool and silk. It was very expensive, and later Pepys gave £24 for a suit. (See June 1st, 1664.) <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-578" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-579" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Roder, knighted August 5th, 1660. Le Neve calls him Roth, and says he was of Utrecht. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-579" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-580" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Nan Hartlib. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-580" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-581" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Bell Tavern in King Street, Westminster, was of some antiquity. It is mentioned in 1466 among Sir John Howard’s expenses, and was famous in the reign of Queen Anne. Here the October Club met. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-581" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-582" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A list of the Officers of the Admiralty, May 31st, 1660.</p>
					<p>From a <abbr>MS.</abbr> in the Pepysian Library in Pepys’s own handwriting.</p>
					<ul>
						<li>
							<p>His Royal Highness James, Duke of York, Lord High Admiral.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Sir George Carteret, Treasurer.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Sir Robert Slingsby, (soon after) Comptroller.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Sir William Batten, Surveyor.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Samuel Pepys, <abbr>Esq.</abbr>, Clerk of the Acts.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>John, Lord Berkeley [of Stratton], Commissioner.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Sir William Penn, Commissioner.</p>
						</li>
						<li>
							<p>Peter Pett, <abbr>Esq.</abbr>, Commissioner.</p>
						</li>
					</ul>
					<p>—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-582" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-583" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir George Carteret, born 1599, had originally been bred to the sea service, and became Comptroller of the Navy to Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, and Governor of Jersey, where he obtained considerable reputation by his gallant defence of that island against the Parliament forces. At the Restoration he was made Vice-Chamberlain to the King, Treasurer of the Navy, and a Privy Councillor, and in 1661 he was elected <abbr>M.P.</abbr> for Portsmouth. In 1666 he exchanged the Treasurership of the Navy with the Earl of Anglesea for the Vice-Treasurership of Ireland. He became a Commissioner of the Admiralty in 1673. He continued in favour with Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> till his death, January 14th, 1679, in his eightieth year. He married his cousin Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Philip Carteret, Knight of <abbr>St.</abbr> Ouen, and had issue three sons and five daughters. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-583" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-584" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Navy Office was erected on the site of Lumley House, formerly belonging to the Fratres Sancta Crucis (or Crutched Friars), and all business connected with naval concerns was transacted there till its removal to Somerset House. The ground was afterwards occupied by the East India Company’s warehouses. The civil business of the Admiralty was removed from Somerset House to Spring Gardens in 1869. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-584" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-585" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The first Excise Office was in Smithfield, and it was frequently removed to different parts of London. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-585" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-586" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“July 5th. His Majesty, the two Dukes, the House of Lords, and the House of Commons, and the Privy Council, dined at the Guildhall. Every Hall appeared with their colours and streamers to attend His Majesty; the Masters in gold chains. Twelve pageants in the streets between Temple Bar and Guildhall. Forty brace of bucks were that day spent in the City of London.”</p>
						<cite>Rugge’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diurnal</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-586" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-587" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Thomas Hayter. He remained with Pepys for some time; and by his assistance was made Petty Purveyor of Petty Missions. He succeeded Pepys as Clerk of the Acts in 1673, and in 1679 he was Secretary of the Admiralty, and Comptroller of the Navy from 1680 to 1682. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-587" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-588" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Richard Cooling or Coling, <abbr>A.M.</abbr>, of All Souls College, Secretary to the Earls of Manchester and Arlington when they filled the office of Lord Chamberlain, and a Clerk of the Privy Council in ordinary. There is a mezzotinto print of him in the Pepysian Collection.—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-588" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-589" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This salary was in place of the ancient fee out of the Exchequer of £33, 6<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> 8<abbr class="currency eoc">d.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-589" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-590" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>During the Commonwealth organs were destroyed all over the country, and the following is the title of the Ordinances under which this destruction took place: “Two Ordinances of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, for the speedy demolishing of all organs, images, and all matters of superstitious monuments in all Cathedrals and Collegiate or Parish Churches and Chapels throughout the Kingdom of England and the dominion of Wales; the better to accomplish the blessed reformation so happily begun, and to remove all offences and things illegal in the worship of God. Dated May 9th, 1644.” When at the period of the Restoration music again obtained its proper place in the services of the Church, there was much work for the organ builders. According to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Rimbault (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Hopkins on the Organ</i>, 1855, <abbr>p.</abbr> 74), it was more than fifty years after the Restoration when our parish churches began commonly to be supplied with organs. Drake says, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Eboracum</i> (published in 1733), that at that date only one parish church in the city of York possessed an organ. Bernard Schmidt, better known as “Father Smith,” came to England from Germany at the time of the Restoration, and he it was who built the organ at the Chapel Royal. He was in high favour with Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, who allowed, him apartments in Whitehall Palace. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-590" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-591" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Henry King, Dean of Rochester, advanced to the See of Chichester, February, 1641–42. Died September 30th, 1669, in the seventy-seventh year of his age. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-591" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-592" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Salisbury, portrait painter, not mentioned by Walpole. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-592" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-593" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Grace which passed the University, on this occasion, is preserved in Kennett’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Chronicle</i>, and commenced as follows:</p>
					<blockquote xml:lang="la">
						<p>“Cum <abbr class="name">Sam.</abbr> Pepys, <abbr>Coll. Magd.</abbr> Inceptor in Artibus in Regiâ Classe existat e Secretis, exindeq. apud mare adeo occupatissimus ut Comitiis proximè futuris interesse non possit; placet vobis ut dictus <abbr class="name">S. P.</abbr> admissionem suam necnon creationem recipiat ad gradum Magistri in Artibus sub personâ Timothei Wellfit, Inceptoris, etc. etc.—June 26, 1660.”</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>See post, August 14th, 1660.—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-593" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-594" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Goring House in <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s Park, the town residence of George, Lord Goring, Earl of Norwich. It occupied the site of Buckingham House, afterwards Buckingham Palace. Goring House was burnt in 1674, at which time the Earl of Arlington was living there. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-594" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-595" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>That would be £1 13<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> 3<abbr class="currency eoc">d.</abbr> The rate at which the Mexico or Seville piece of eight was to be received was 4<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> 9<abbr class="currency eoc">d.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-595" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-596" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The motive for Sir Edward Montagu’s so suddenly altering his intended title is not explained; probably, the change was adopted as a compliment to the town of Sandwich, off which the Fleet was lying before it sailed to bring Charles from Scheveling. Montagu had also received marked attentions from Sir John Boys and other principal men at Sandwich; and it may be recollected, as an additional reason, that one or both of the seats for that borough have usually been placed at the disposal of the Admiralty. The title of Portsmouth was given, in 1673, for her life, to the celebrated Louise de Querouaille, and becoming extinct with her, was, in 1743, conferred upon John Wallop, Viscount Lymington, the ancestor of the present Earl of Portsmouth.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-596" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-597" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Pepys was a frequent visitor to the Dolphin, which was conveniently situated in Tower Street. There is a farthing token of this tavern which is dated 1650 (see <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Boyne’s Trade Tokens</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Williamson, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 1889, <abbr>p.</abbr> 779). <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-597" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-598" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir John Berkeley, son of Sir Maurice Berkeley of Bruton, <abbr>co.</abbr> Somerset, knighted at Berwick in 1637–8. He was distinguished as a royalist officer in the Civil Wars, and created Baron Berkeley of Stratton in 1658 by letters patent dated at Brussels. At the Restoration he was appointed an Extra Commissioner of the Navy, which office he held until December, 1664; sworn in the Privy Council in 1663, and appointed Lord Lieutenant of Ireland in 1670. He went as ambassador to France in 1674. He built, in 1665, a mansion in Piccadilly, at a cost of £30,000, called Berkeley House, which was destroyed by fire in 1733, when in the possession of the Duke of Devonshire, and Devonshire House now occupies its site. He died in 1678. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-598" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-599" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Willoughby’s name does not occur in the list of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Naval Commissioners, 1660–1760, by Sir George Jackson</i>, privately printed by Sir <abbr class="name">G. F.</abbr> Duckett in 1889. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-599" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-600" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Six Clerks’ Office was in Chancery Lane, near the Holborn end. The business of the office was to enrol commissions, pardons, patents, warrants, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, that had passed the Great Seal; also other business in Chancery. “In the early history of the Court of Chancery, the Six Clerks and their under-clerks appear to have acted as the attorneys of the suitors. As business increased, these under-clerks became a distinct body, and were recognized by the court under the denomination of ‘sworn clerks,’ or ‘clerks in court.’ The advance of commerce, with its consequent accession of wealth, so multiplied the subjects requiring the judgment of a Court of Equity, that the limits of a public office were found wholly inadequate to supply a sufficient number of officers to conduct the business of the suitors. Hence originated the ‘Solicitors’ of the Court of Chancery.” See Smith’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Chancery Practice</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 62, 3rd edit. The “Six Clerks” were abolished by act of Parliament, 5 <abbr>Vict. c.</abbr> 5. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-600" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-601" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Edward, second Lord Montagu of Boughton. He died 1683. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-601" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-602" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Earls of Worcester had a large house in the Strand between Durham Place and the Savoy, the site of which is now marked by Beaufort Buildings, which Lord Clarendon rented while his own mansion was building. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-602" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-603" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Barbara Villiers, only child of William, second Viscount Grandison, born November, 1640, married April 14th, 1659, to Roger Palmer, created Earl of Castlemaine, 1661. She became the King’s mistress soon after the Restoration, and was in 1670 made Baroness Nonsuch, Countess of Southampton, and Duchess of Cleveland. She had six children by the King, one of them being created Duke of Grafton, and the eldest son succeeding her as Duke of Cleveland. She subsequently married Beau Fielding, whom she prosecuted for bigamy. She died October 9th, 1709, aged sixty-nine. Her life was written by <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Steinman Steinman, and privately printed 1871, with addenda 1874, and second addenda 1878. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-603" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-604" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Major Tollhurst was an old friend of Pepys’s, and is mentioned again on January 9th, 1662–63. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-604" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-605" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Payne Fisher, who styled himself Paganus Piscator, was born in 1616, in Dorsetshire, and removed from Hart Hall, Oxford, of which he had been a commoner, to Magdalene College, Cambridge, in 1634, and there took a degree of <abbr>B.A.</abbr>, and first discovered a turn for poetry. He was afterwards a captain in the King's service at Marston Moor fight; but, leaving his command, employed his pen against the cause which he had supported with his sword, and became a favourite of Cromwell’s. After the King's return, he obtained a scanty subsistence by flattering men in power, and was frequently imprisoned for debt. He borrowed from Pepys, see post 28th of this same month. He died, 1693, in the Fleet Prison (<abbr>Harl. MS.</abbr> 1460). He published several poems, chiefly in Latin and, in 1682, printed a book of Heraldry, with the arms of such of the gentry as he had waited upon with presentation copies. He was a man of talents, but vain, unsteady, and conceited, and a great time-server.—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-605" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-606" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Jack Spicer, brother clerk of the Privy Seal. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-606" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-607" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>William Hewer, of whose family little more is known than that his father died of the plague, September 14th, 1665. He was first the clerk, and afterwards the faithful friend of Pepys, who died in his house at Clapham, previously the residence of Sir Dennis Gauden. He was appointed Deputy Judge Advocate of the Fleet in 1677, and Commissioner of the Navy in 1685, and elected <abbr>M.P.</abbr> for Yarmouth, Isle of Wight, in 1685. He was also Treasurer for Tangier. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hewer was buried in the old church at Clapham, where a large monument of marble, with his bust in alto-relievo, erected to his memory, was, on the rebuilding of the church, placed outside. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-607" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-608" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The New Exchange on the south side of the Strand, built on the site of the stables of Durham House. The first stone was laid June 10th, 1608, and the new building was named by James <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> “Britain’s Burse.” It was a much frequented place after the Restoration, and the destruction of the Royal Exchange in the Great Fire caused it much prosperity for a time. It was taken down in 1737. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-608" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-609" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The oath of allegiance was printed on July 2nd. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-609" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-610" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Robert Barnwell. He died in 1662. See post, June 4th, 1662. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-610" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-611" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Still retains the name New Street. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-611" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-612" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>As Earl of Sandwich. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-612" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-613" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This is still railed off from <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s Park, and called the Enclosure. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-613" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-614" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir William Morrice, born November 6th, 1602, at Exeter, Secretary of State from 1660 to 1668. He died December 12th, 1676. He was kinsman to General Monk. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-614" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-615" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>They were both clerks of the Privy Seal. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-615" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-616" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>My dining with <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Creed and seeing the Butlers ought to be placed in yesterday’s account, it being put here by mistake.</p>
						<cite>Pepys</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-616" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-617" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>In the Journals this is stated to have taken place July 24th. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-617" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-618" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Gatehouse at Westminster was a prison. Perhaps they were friends of the keeper. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-618" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-619" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Frances Butler, the beauty. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-619" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-620" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Earl of Manchester was chosen Speaker of the House of Lords, see ante, April 26th, 1660. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-620" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-621" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>August, 1661:</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“This year the Fair, called <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s Fair, was kept the full appointed time, being a fortnight; but during that time many lewd and infamous persons were by his Majesty’s express command to the Lord Chamberlain, and his Lordship’s direction to Robert Nelson, <abbr>Esq.</abbr>, committed to the House of Correction.”</p>
						<cite>Rugge’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diurnal</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p><abbr>St.</abbr> James’s fair was held first in the open space near <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s Palace, and afterwards in <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s Market. It was prohibited by the Parliament in 1651, but revived at the Restoration. It was, however, finally suppressed before the close of the reign of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-621" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-622" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This is one of the earliest references to Pall Mall as an inhabited street, and also one of the earliest uses of the word clubbing. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-622" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-623" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Half a piece was valued at 2<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> 4½<abbr class="currency">d.</abbr>, see ante, July 10th. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-623" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-624" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>Some clocks are still made with a small ball, or bullet, on an inclined plane, which turns every minute. The King’s clocks probably dropped bullets. Gainsborough the painter had a brother who was a dissenting minister at Henley-on-Thames, and possessed a strong genius for mechanics. He invented a clock of a very peculiar construction, which, after his death, was deposited in the British Museum. It told the hour by a little bell, and was kept in motion by a leaden bullet, which dropped from a spiral reservoir at the top of the clock, into a little ivory bucket. This was so contrived as to discharge it at the bottom, and by means of a counterweight was carried up to the top of the clock, where it received another bullet, which was discharged as the former. This seems to have been an attempt at the perpetual motion.</p>
						<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Gentleman’s Magazine</i>, 1785, <abbr>p.</abbr> 931</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-624" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-625" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Brian Duppa, born March 10th, 1588–9, tutor to the Prince of Wales, afterwards Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, successively Bishop of Chichester, Salisbury, and Winchester. Died March 26th, 1662. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-625" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-626" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Baptist, third Viscount Campden, Lord Lieutenant of Rutlandshire. Died 1682. Campden House was built about 1612 by Sir Baptist Hicks, first Viscount Campden. The third Earl entertained Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> here immediately after the Restoration. The house was burnt down March 23rd, 1862, and rebuilt soon afterwards. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-626" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-627" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The manor of Lisson Green (Domesday Lilesstone) remained a rural district till the end of the last century, and Dodsley (1761) describes it as “a pleasant village near Paddington.” Marylebone was quite a country place in Pepys’s day, and long after. <a href="../text/chapter-7.xhtml#noteref-627" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-628" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The clerks of the Privy Seal took the duty of attendance for a month by turns. <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-628" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-629" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>There is a farthing token of the Sun in New Fish Street (see <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Boyne’s Trade Tokens</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Williamson, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 1889, <abbr>p.</abbr> 681). <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-629" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-630" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Pepys wished to let his house in Axe Yard now that he had apartments at the Navy Office. <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-630" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-631" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This well-known theatre was situated in <abbr>St.</abbr> John’s Street on the site of Red Bull Yard. Pepys went there on March 23rd, 1661, when he expressed a very poor opinion of the place. <abbr class="name">T.</abbr> Carew, in some commendatory lines on Sir William. Davenant’s play, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Just Italian</i>, 1630, abuses both audiences and actors:⁠—</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“There are the men in crowded heaps that throng</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To that adulterate stage, where not a tongue</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of th’ untun’d kennel can a line repeat</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Of serious sense.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>There is a token of this house (see <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Boyne’s Trade Tokens</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Williamson, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 1889, <abbr>p.</abbr> 725). <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-631" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-632" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir John Robinson, clothworker, son of Archdeacon Robinson of Nottingham. He was one of the Commissioners sent to Breda to desire Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> to return to England immediately, and was created a baronet for his services to the King, 1660, and had an augmentation to his arms. He was alderman of Dowgate, afterwards of Cripplegate; Lord Mayor, 1662. He retained the Lieutenancy of the Tower till 1678. A portrait of him is at Clothworkers’ Hall. <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-632" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-633" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Lady Jemima Montage, daughter of Lord Sandwich, previously described as <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> <abbr class="name eoc">Jem.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-633" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-634" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Heneage Finch, son of Sir Heneage Finch, Recorder of London, was born December 23rd, 1621. He was called to the bar in 1645, and soon obtained considerable fame as a counsel. He was styled “the silver-tongued lawyer,” “the English Cicero,” and “the English Roscius.” A week after the King’s return in 1660 he was appointed Solicitor-General and created a baronet; Attorney-General, 1670; Lord Keeper, and created Baron Finch, 1673; Lord Chancellor, 1675; Earl of Nottingham, 1681. Died December 18th, 1682. <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-634" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-635" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Colonel Cary Dillon, a friend of the Butlers, who courted the fair Frances; but the engagement was subsequently broken off, see December 31st, 1661. <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-635" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-636" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This was Samuel Hartlib the younger, son of the friend of Milton, who was a neighbour of Pepys in Axe Yard. When Pepys refers to the elder Samuel Hartlib he calls him <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hartlib. In Dircks’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Biographical Memoir of Samuel Hartlib</i> (1865), the mistake is made of supposing that the Samuel Hartlib here referred to was the elder, and Nan Hartlib his sister instead of his daughter. <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-636" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-637" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir John Roder or Roth, see ante, July 1st and 10th. <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-637" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-638" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Holland House, the fine old mansion still standing at Kensington, was greatly added to and improved by Henry Rich, Earl of Holland, who was beheaded, March 9th, 1649. His house was afterwards successively occupied by Generals Fairfax and Lambert, but subsequently it was restored to the earl’s widow; she seems to have let a portion of the house. <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-638" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-639" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Catan did not take the good advice offered her, but married <abbr>Mons.</abbr> Petit. See October 23rd, 1660. <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-639" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-640" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Heneage Finch, Earl of Winchelsea. Died 1689. <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-640" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-641" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Races in Hyde Park were fashionable in the reign of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. They were usually run round the Ring. <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-641" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-642" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Claypole (born August 21st, 1625) married, on January 13th, 1645–46, Elizabeth, second daughter of Oliver Cromwell, to whom he became Master of the Horse, and a Lord of the Bedchamber: he was also placed in his father-in-law’s Upper House. During Richard Cromwell’s time he retained all his places at Court; and at the Restoration he was not molested. He was arrested in June, 1678, and imprisoned in the Tower, but speedily released. He died June 26th, 1688. His father had been proceeded against in the Star Chamber, for resisting the payment of Ship Money, and was by Cromwell constituted Clerk of the Hanaper, and created a baronet. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Claypole died August 6th, 1658. <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-642" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-643" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Henry Cooke, chorister of the Chapel Royal, adhered to the royal cause at the breaking out of the Civil Wars, and for his bravery obtained a captain’s commission. At the Restoration he received the appointment of Master of the Children of the Chapel Royal; he was an excellent musician, and three of his pupils turned out very distinguished musicians, <abbr>viz.</abbr>, Pelham Humphrey, John Blow, and Michael Wise. He was one of the original performers in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Siege of Rhodes</i>. He died July 13th, 1672, and was buried in the cloisters of Westminster Abbey. In another place, Pepys says, “a vain coxcomb he is, though he sings so well.” <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-643" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-644" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Edward Montagu, second Earl of Manchester, <abbr>K.G.</abbr>, Lord Chamberlain, died 1671. <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-644" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-645" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Pickering married a fortune of £5,000; see post, November 5th, 1666. <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-645" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-646" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Captain Henry Cuttance. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Speedwell</i> was originally the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Cheriton</i>, see ante, May 1st, 1660. <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-646" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-647" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>See ante, July 8th, 1660. <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-647" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-648" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A yacht which was greatly admired, and was imitated and improved by Commissioner Pett, who built a yacht for the King in 1661, which was called the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Jenny</i>. Queen Elizabeth had a yacht, and one was built by Phineas Pett in 1604. <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-648" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-649" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Cockpit Theatre, situated in Drury Lane, was occupied as a playhouse in the reign of James <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. It was occupied by Davenant and his company in 1658, and they remained in it until November 15th, 1660, when they removed to Salisbury Court. <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-649" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-650" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A tragi-comedy by Beaumont and Fletcher. Kynaston’s part was Olympia. <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-650" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-651" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Edward Kynaston, engaged by Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Davenant, in 1660, to perform the principal female characters: he afterwards assumed the male ones in the first parts of tragedy, and continued on the stage till the end of King William’s reign. He died in 1712. Who played Archas is unknown; but Betterton, as Downes tells us, was early distinguished for playing in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Loyal Subject</i>. <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-651" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-652" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Daniel Milles, <abbr>D.D.</abbr>, thirty-two years rector of <abbr>St.</abbr> Olave’s, Hart Street, and buried there, October, 1689, aged sixty-three. He was appointed April 17th, 1657. Newcourt (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Repertorium</i>) writes, “Dan Mills was admitted to the church in the late times of usurpation by the Commission for approving of Publick Preachers, but at whose presentation I know not.” In 1667 Sir Robert Brooks presented him to the rectory of Wanstead, in Essex, which he also held till his death. <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-652" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-653" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>It is said that these woolpacks were placed in the House of Lords for the judges to sit on, so that the fact that wool was a main source of our national wealth might be kept in the popular mind. The Lord Chancellor’s seat is now called the Woolsack. <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-653" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-654" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Henry Hickman, a native of Worcestershire, took the degree of <abbr>B.A.</abbr> at <abbr>St.</abbr> Catherine’s Hall, Cambridge, and, migrating to Oxford, obtained a fellowship at Magdalen College, from the usurping powers, which he lost in 1660, to make room for the rightful owner. He then retired to Holland and passed most of his time abroad, dying at Leyden in 1692. He wrote several theological tracts, and was considered a severe enemy to the ceremonies of the Church of England.—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-654" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-655" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Colonel John Birch, elected <abbr>M.P.</abbr> for Leominster in 1646, and continued until 1660. He represented Penrhyn in the parliament of 1661. <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-655" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-656" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Monk, Duke of Albemarle, was appointed Lord Lieutenant of Ireland with the understanding that he should perform the duties by deputy. <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-656" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-657" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Robartes, second Lord Robartes, afterwards (1661) Lord Privy Seal, advanced to the Earldom of Radnor, 1679. Lord Robartes went again to Ireland as Lord Lieutenant in 1669. Died 1685. <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-657" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-658" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>James Butler, afterwards created Duke of Ormond, and <abbr>K.G.</abbr>, and twice Lord Lieutenant of Ireland. <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-658" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-659" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> (afterwards Sir William) Walker was one of the Judges of the Admiralty. <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-659" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-660" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Phineas Pett, Assistant Master Shipwright at Chatham, was suspended on this frivolous charge, and dismissed in October. <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-660" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-661" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“Melons were hardly known in England till Sir George Gardiner brought one from Spain, when they became in general estimation. The ordinary price was five or six shillings.”</p>
						<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Quarterly Review</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xix</span></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-661" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-662" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The gallery built for the officers of the Navy House remained until the restoration of the church in 1870–71 under the direction of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> (now Sir Arthur) Blomfield, <abbr class="eoc">A.R.A.</abbr> The memorial to Pepys, erected in 1884, was placed on the wall where the gallery was situated. <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-662" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-663" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Thomas Pepys, <abbr>M.A.</abbr>, <abbr>M.D.</abbr>, son of Talbot Pepys of Middle Temple and Impington, born at Norwich, June 5th, 1621, Fellow of Trinity Hall, Cambridge. He died unmarried at Impington. <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-663" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-664" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la"><abbr class="name">Jo.</abbr> Barclaii Argenis. <abbr>Lugd. Bat.</abbr> 1659</i> is in the Pepysian Library, as also the second and third parts published in 1689. <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-664" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-665" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Colonel Adrian Scroope, one of the persons who sat in judgment upon Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-665" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-666" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Pepys refers to two Wills. This was Will Wayneman; the other was William Hewer. <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-666" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-667" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Hewer. <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-667" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-668" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>12 <abbr>Car.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <abbr>cap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, an act of free and general pardon, indemnity, and oblivion. <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-668" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-669" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The fashion of placing black patches on the face was introduced towards the close of the reign of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, and the practice is ridiculed in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Spectator</i>. <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-669" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-670" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Probably Josiah Child (born 1630), Deputy Treasurer of the Fleet, Mayor of Portsmouth, Director, and afterwards Chairman of the East India Company, which he ruled despotically. He wrote <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Brief Observations on Trade</i>, 1668, a second edition of which appeared in 1690 as <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A new Discourse of Trade</i>, and which went through many subsequent editions. He was created a baronet in 1678, and died June 22nd, 1699. <a href="../text/chapter-8.xhtml#noteref-670" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-671" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Mary, Princess Royal and Princess of Orange, who died in December of this year. <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-671" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-672" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Claude Lamoral, Prince de Ligne, had commanded the cavalry in the Low Countries, was afterwards Viceroy of Sicily and Governor of Milan. He died at Madrid in 1679. He had married, by dispensation, his cousin Maria Clara of Nassau, widow of his brother Albert Henry, who had died without issue. In our own time his descendant, the Prince de Ligne, was Ambassador Extraordinary from Belgium at the coronation of Queen Victoria.—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-672" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-673" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Henry Ferne, born at York in 1602, <abbr>D.D.</abbr> 1643, Chaplain Extraordinary to Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, Master of Trinity College, Cambridge, Dean of Ely, 1662, Bishop of Chester, February, 1661–62, and died five weeks after his consecration on the 16th March. He wrote many controversial pamphlets. <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-673" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-674" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Gustavus <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span>, King of Sweden. <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-674" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-675" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>“Both Sir Williams” is a favourite expression with Pepys, meaning Sir William Batten and Sir William Penn. <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-675" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-676" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Colonel, afterwards Sir Robert Slingsby, <abbr>Bart.</abbr>, appointed Comptroller of the Navy in 1660. He died October 28th, 1661, and Pepys grieved for his loss. <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-676" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-677" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Philip, Duke of Anjou, afterwards Duke of Orleans, brother of Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span> (born 1640, died 1701), married the Princess Henrietta, youngest daughter of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, who was born June 16th, 1644, at Exeter. She was known as “La belle Henriette.” In May, 1670, she came to Dover on a political mission from Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span> to her brother Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, but the visit was undertaken much against the wish of her husband. Her death occurred on her return to France, and was attributed to poison. It was the occasion of one of the finest of Bossuet’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Oraisons Funèbres</i>. <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-677" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-678" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Hugh Peters, born at Fowey, Cornwall, and educated at Trinity College, Cambridge, where he graduated <abbr>M.A.</abbr> 1622. He was tried as one of the regicides, and executed. A broadside, entitled <i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">The Welsh Hubub, or the Unkennelling and earthing of Hugh Peters that crafty Fox</i>, was printed October 3rd, 1660. <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-678" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-678" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Major Hart; he lived in Cannon Street; see post, September 20th. <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-678" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-680" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Trained Bands were abolished in 1663, but those of the City of London were specially excepted. The officers of the Trained Bands were supplied by the <abbr>Hon.</abbr> Artillery Company. <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-680" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-681" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Bear at the Bridge foot was a famous tavern at the Southwark end of old London Bridge, on the west side of High Street. It was pulled down in December, 1761. <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-681" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-682" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Liberty to hold an annual fair in Southwark on September 7th, 8th, and 9th, was granted to the City of London by the charter of 2 Edward <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> (November 2nd, 1462). Though the allowed time for its continuance by charter was only three days, it generally continued, like other fairs, for fourteen days. <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-682" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-683" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Thomæ Bartholini Anatomia</i>, Hagæ Comitis, 1660, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Joannis Rosini Antiquitatum Romanarum Corpus</i>, Amstelodami, 1685, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Petri Gassendi Institutio Astronomica</i>, 1683, are in Pepys’s library. <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-683" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-684" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A gold coin varying in value at different times from 6<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> 8<abbr class="currency">d.</abbr> to 10<abbr class="currency eoc">s.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-684" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-685" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Elizabeth Stradwick, sister of Richard Pepys, and wife of Thomas Stradwick. <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-685" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-686" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Probably an Indian rattan cane. <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-686" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-687" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Elegies on the Duke of Gloucester’s death were printed. One of these was entitled, “Some Teares dropt on the Herse of the incomparable Prince Henry, Duke of Gloucester.” <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-687" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-688" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Mitre in Wood Street was kept by William Proctor, who died insolvent of the plague, 1665 (see July 31st, 1665). The tavern was destroyed in the Great Fire (see <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Boyne’s Trade Tokens</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Williamson, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 1889, <abbr>p.</abbr> 800). <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-688" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-689" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Nathaniel Hardy, <abbr>D.D.</abbr>, was for many years preacher at the church of <abbr>St.</abbr> Dionis Backchurch, and on August 10th, 1660, he was appointed rector of that parish. He was son of Anthony Hardy, and born in the Old Bailey, September 14th, 1618. He became a prominent Presbyterian minister, but after the Treaty of Uxbridge, 1644, he changed his opinions, and preached a recantation sermon in London. He was appointed Dean of Rochester, December 10th, 1660, and vicar of <abbr>St.</abbr> Martin’s-in-the-Fields. Died at Croydon, June 1st, 1670, and was buried in the church of <abbr>St.</abbr> Martin’s. <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-689" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-690" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Aubrey de Vere, then twentieth Earl of Oxford, survived till March 12, 1702–3, when the title became extinct. <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-690" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-691" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This is the Mall in <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s Park, which was made by Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, the former Mall (Pall Mall) having been built upon during the Commonwealth. Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> also formed the canal by throwing the several small ponds into one. <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-691" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-692" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>“The Queen-mother of France,” says Ward, in his Diary, <abbr>p.</abbr> 177, “died at Agrippina, 1642, and her son Louis, 1643, for whom King Charles mourned in Oxford in <em>purple, which is Prince’s mourning</em>.” <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-692" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-693" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>According to Noble, Jeremiah White married Lady Frances Cromwell’s waiting-woman, in Oliver’s lifetime, and they lived together fifty years. Lady Frances had two husbands, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Robert Rich and Sir John Russell of Chippenham, the last of whom she survived fifty-two years dying 1721⁠–⁠22 The story is, that Oliver found White on his knees to Frances Cromwell, and that, to save himself, he pretended to have been soliciting her interest with her waiting-woman, whom Oliver compelled him to marry. (Noble’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of Cromwell</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> <abbr>pp.</abbr> 151, 152.) White was born in 1629 and died 1707. <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-693" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-694" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Elizabeth, wife of Oliver Cromwell. <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-694" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-695" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“A game at cards not unlike Loo, but with this difference, the winner of one trick has to put in a double stake, the winner of two tricks a triple stake, and so on. Thus, if six persons are playing, and the general stake is 1<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr>, suppose A gains the three tricks, he gains 6<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr>, and has to ‘hand i’ the cap,’ or pool, 4<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> for the next deal. Suppose A gains two tricks and B one, then A gains 4<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> and B 2<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr>, and A has to stake 3<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> and B 2<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> for the next deal.”</p>
						<cite>Hindley’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tavern Anecdotes</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>—<abbr class="name">M.</abbr> <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-695" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-696" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Vice-Admiral. <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-696" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-697" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Old Swan tavern in Thames Street was a very old house, and mention of it is found as early as 1323. There is a token of Richard Evans dated 1668, which must have been issued from the new building, as the old tavern was destroyed in the Great Fire (see <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Boyne’s Trade Tokens</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Williamson, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 1889, <abbr>p.</abbr> 768). <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-697" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-698" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Samphire was formerly a favourite pickle; hence the “dangerous trade” of the samphire gatherer (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">King Lear</i>, act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> <abbr>sc.</abbr> 6) who supplied the demand. It was sold in the streets, and one of the old London cries was “I ha’ Rock Samphier, Rock Samphier!” <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-698" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-699" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A fort four miles east of Dunkirk, probably dismantled when that town was sold to Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span>. <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-699" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-700" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>In the Strand; built, under the auspices of James <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, in 1608, out of the stables of Durham House, the site of the present Adelphi. The New Exchange stood where Coutts’s banking-house now is. “It was built somewhat on the model of the Royal Exchange, with cellars beneath, a walk above, and rows of shops over that, filled chiefly with milliners, sempstresses, and the like.” It was also called “Britain’s Burse.”</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“He has a lodging in the Strand … to watch when ladies are gone to the china houses, or to the <em>Exchange</em>, that he may meet them by chance and give them presents, some two or three hundred pounds worth of toys, to be laughed at”</p>
						<cite>Ben Jonson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Silent Woman</i>, act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> <abbr>sc.</abbr> 1</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-700" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-701" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Probably Joyce Norton, see <a href="#note-88">note 88</a>. <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-701" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-702" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Pepys apparently was ignorant of the instructions in the Levitical law, “Then shalt thou kill the ram, and take of his blood and put it upon the tip of the right ear of Aaron, and upon the tip of the right ear of his sons, and upon the thumb of their right hand, and upon the great toe of their right foot.” Exodus <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxix</span> 20. (See also Leviticus <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span> 23, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiv</span> 14.) <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-702" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-703" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Richard Pepys, eldest son of Richard Pepys, Lord Chief Justice of Ireland. He went to Boston, <abbr>Mass.</abbr>, in 1634, and returned to England about 1646. <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-703" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-704" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>William Wilde, elected Recorder on November 3rd, 1659, and appointed one of the commissioners sent to Breda to desire Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> to return to England immediately. He was knighted after the King’s return, called to the degree of Serjeant, and created a baronet, all in the same year. In 1668 he ceased to be Recorder, and was appointed judge of the Court of Common Pleas. In 1673 he was removed to the King’s Bench. He was turned out of his office in 1679 on account of his action in connection with the Popish Plot, and died November 23rd of the same year. <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-704" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-705" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>James Howell directed a letter from Middleburg in Zealand, June 6th, 1619, to “Captain Francis Bacon, at the Glass house in Broad Street.” Monk was lodged there in February, 1659–60. The place was burned in the Great Fire. <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-705" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-706" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Luke Cheynell, a hop merchant, is mentioned not very respectfully in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Select City Quæries, by Mercurius Philalethes</i>, Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, London, 1660. This may be the same person. <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-706" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-707" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Colonel, afterwards Sir Robert Slingsby, Comptroller of the Navy, whose father. Sir Guildford Slingsby, held the same office. See ante, September 5th. <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-707" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-708" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir Richard Ford was one of the commissioners sent to Breda to desire Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> to return to England immediately. <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-708" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-709" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Mercurius Politicus</i> of September 30th, 1658, sets forth:</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>That excellent and by all Physicians, approved, China drink, called by the Chineans Tcha, by other nations Tay alias Tee, is sold at the Sultaness Head Coffeehouse, in Sweetings Rents, by the “Royal Exchange, London.”</p>
					</blockquote>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“Coffee, chocolate, and a kind of drink called <em>tee</em>, sold in almost every street in 1659.”</p>
						<cite>Rugge’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diurnal</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>It is stated in Boyne’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Trade Tokens</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Williamson, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 1889, <abbr>p.</abbr> 593 “that the word tea occurs on no other tokens than those issued from ‘the Great Turk’ (Morat y<sup>e</sup> Great) coffeehouse in Exchange Alley. The Dutch East India Company introduced tea into Europe in 1610, and it is said to have been first imported into England from Holland about 1650. The English “East India Company” purchased and presented 2<abbr>lbs.</abbr> of tea to Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> in 1660, and 23⅔<abbr>lbs.</abbr> in 1666. The first order for its importation by the company was in 1668, and the first consignment of it, amounting to 143<abbr>lbs.</abbr>, was received from Bantam in 1669 (see Sir George Birdwood’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Report on the Old Records at the India Office</i>, 1890, <abbr>p.</abbr> 26). By act 12 <abbr>Car.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>capp.</abbr> 23, 24, a duty of 8<abbr class="currency">d.</abbr> per gallon was imposed upon the infusion of tea, as well as on chocolate and sherbet. <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-709" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-710" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“The Princess Royall came from Gravesend to Whitehall by water, attended by a noble retinue of about one hundred persons, gentry, and servants, and tradesmen, and tirewomen, and others, that took that opportunity to advance their fortunes, by coming in with so excellent a Princess as without question she is.”</p>
						<cite>Rugge’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diurnal</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>A broadside, entitled <i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">Ourania, the High and Mighty Lady the Princess Royal of Aurange, congratulated on her most happy arrival, September the 25th, 1660</i>, was printed on the 29th. <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-710" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-711" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">The Tredagh</i>, a third-rate of fifty guns, had its name changed to <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Resolution</i>. <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-711" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-712" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A shoal in the North Sea, off the Thames mouth, outside the Long Sand, fifteen miles <abbr class="compass">N.N.E.</abbr> of the North Foreland. It measures seven miles northeastward, and about two miles in breadth. It is partly dry at low water. A revolving light was set up in 1840. <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-712" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-713" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A Prospect of the most famous Parts of the World… by John Speed</i> London, 1631, is in the Pepysian Library. <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-713" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-714" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir <abbr class="name">Wm.</abbr> Doyly was <abbr>M.P.</abbr> for the borough of Great Yarmouth. <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-714" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-715" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This is the first mention in the Diary of this famous prince, third son of Frederick, Prince Palatine of the Rhine, and Elizabeth, daughter of James <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, born December 17th, 1619. He died at his house in Spring Gardens, November 29th, 1682. <a href="../text/chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-715" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-716" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The four humours of the body described by the old physicians were supposed to exert their influence upon the mind, and in course of time the mind as well as the body was credited with its own particular humours. The modern restricted use of the word humour did not become general until the eighteenth century. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-716" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-717" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Pepys of Cottenham (who died 1604) married the daughter of John Bendish of Bower Hall, Steeple Bumsted, <abbr>co.</abbr> Essex, so they may have thought there was some relationship. Sir Thomas Bendish was an Essex baronet, and for many years English ambassador at the Porte. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-717" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-718" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Accepted Frewen, Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, died March 28th, 1664. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-718" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-719" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Brian Duppa, translated from Salisbury, died March 26th, 1662. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-719" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-720" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>William Roberts, elected 1637, died August 12th, 1665. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-720" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-721" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Warner, elected 1637, died October 14th, 1666, aged eighty-six. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-721" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-722" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>William Pierce, translated from Peterborough, 1632, died April, 1670. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-722" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-723" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Humphrey Henchman, elected 1660, translated to London, 1663, died October 7th, 1675, aged eighty-three. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-723" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-724" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>William Spurstow, <abbr>D.D.</abbr>, Vicar of Hackney and Master of Catherine Hall, Cambridge, both which pieces of preferment he lost for nonconformity, 1662. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-724" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-725" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Anne Hyde, born March 12th, 1637, daughter of Edward, first Earl of Clarendon. She was attached to the court of the Princess of Orange, daughter of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, 1654, and contracted to James, Duke of York, at Breda, November 24th, 1659. The marriage was avowed in London September 3rd, 1660. She joined the Church of Rome in 1669, and died March 31st, 1671. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-725" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-726" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Duke of York married Anne Hyde, and he avowed the marriage September 3rd, so that Pepys was rather behindhand in his information. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-726" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-727" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>James Lamb, <abbr>D.D.</abbr>, installed prebendary of Westminster July 23rd, 1660, rector of <abbr>St.</abbr> Andrew’s, Holbom, 1662, died 1664. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-727" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-728" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Fuller’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Church History of Britain</i>. There is a copy of the edition of 1656 in the Pepysian Library. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-728" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-729" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Lord Sandwich’s portrait by Lely, see post, 22nd of this same month. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-729" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-730" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A figurative expression for an eager longing desire, used by Udall and by Spenser. The latest authority given by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Murray in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">New English Dictionary</i>, is Bailey in 1725. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-730" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-731" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The usual corruption of the name Rotherhithe. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-731" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-732" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir Hardress Waller, <abbr>Knt.</abbr>, one of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>’s judges. His sentence was commuted to imprisonment for life. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-732" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-733" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Thomas Scott, the regicide Secretary of State. See ante, <a href="#note-112">note 112</a>. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-733" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-734" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Cook, a member of Gray’s Inn, appointed Solicitor-General for the Commonwealth, and ordered to prepare the charge against Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. Owing to the illness of the Attorney-General, the conduct of the prosecution fell chiefly upon him. He was rewarded for his services by being made Master of the Hospital of <abbr>St.</abbr> Cross. In 1655 appointed Justice of the Court of Upper Bench in Ireland. He was excluded by name from the Act of Indemnity, and executed October 16th, 1660. He wrote several pamphlets, some of which were very scurrilous in language. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-734" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-735" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>See ante, September 5th. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-735" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-736" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>General Thomas Harrison, son of a butcher at Newcastle-under-Lyme, appointed by Cromwell to convey Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> from Windsor to Whitehall, in order to his trial. He signed the warrant for the execution of the King. He was hanged, drawn, and quartered on the 13th. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-736" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-737" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Second son of John Bridgeman, Bishop of Chester, became, after the Restoration, successively Chief Baron of the Exchequer, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and Lord Keeper of the Great Seal (1667). He was created a baronet in 1660. In 1672 he was removed from the office of Lord Keeper, and he died June 25th, 1674. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-737" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-738" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>It is said that Le Notre, the architect of the groves and grottos at Versailles, was engaged by Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> to arrange the improvements in <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s Park, but <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Morison seems to have been the King's chief adviser. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-738" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-739" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Cockpit theatre in Drury Lane. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-739" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-740" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>Nicholas Burt ranked in the list of good actors after the Restoration, though he resigned the part of Othello to Hart, who had previously acted Cassio when Burt took the Moor.</p>
						<cite>Davies’ <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dramatic Miscellanies</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 221</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-740" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-741" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>In Fleet Street, opposite Clifford’s Inn Passage. The keeper of the tavern appears to have been Edward Oldham, who issued a token (see <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Boyne’s Trade Tokens</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Williamson, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 1889, <abbr>p.</abbr> 604). <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-741" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-742" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Major (afterwards Colonel) Norwood, Deputy Governor of Tangier. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-742" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-743" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Herbert Croft, Dean of Hereford, consecrated Bishop of Hereford, February 9th, 1661–2. He succeeded Bishop Morley as Dean of the Chapel. Burnet says, “Crofts was a warm devout man, but of no discretion in his conduct; so he lost ground quickly. He used much freedom with the King, but it was in the wrong place, not in private but in the pulpit.” Bishop Croft died at Hereford, May 18th, 1691. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-743" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-744" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Carew signed the warrant for the execution of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. He held the religion of the Fifth Monarchists, and was tried October 12th, 1660. He refused to avail himself of many opportunities of escape, and suffered death with much composure. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-744" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-745" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A comedy by Beaumont and Fletcher, first printed in 1639, and again in 1661. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-745" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-746" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Col.</abbr> Francis Hacker commanded the guards at the King’s execution. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-746" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-747" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Axtell had guarded the High Court of Justice. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-747" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-748" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Crowe was fined for Alderman in 1663, see post, December 1st of that year, but he appears to have taken the office subsequently, see October 15th, 1668. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-748" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-749" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The old gate was taken down in 1617, and rebuilt in the same year from a design by Gerard Christmas. The gate was injured in the Great Fire, but was repaired and remained until 1761. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-749" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-750" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Peter Lely, afterwards knighted. He lived in the Piazza, Covent Garden. This portrait was bought by Lord Braybrooke at <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pepys Cockerell’s sale in 1848, and is now at Audley End. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-750" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-751" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The edition in the Pepysian Library of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Certain Sermons or Homilies appointed to be read in Churches</i> is dated 1673. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-751" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-752" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>See ante, August 8th. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-752" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-753" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The child was born October 22nd. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-753" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-754" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>William Lilly, the astrologer and almanack-maker, born 1602. He lived in the Strand, and died in 1681. His <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Merlinus Anglicus Junior</i> was read to the Parhament’s troops in Scotland as promising victory. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-754" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-755" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Elias Ashmole, the antiquary, born May 23rd, 1617. He was for a time in the royal army, but subsequently he settled in London, and became associated with the astrologers. He was made Windsor Herald on June 18th, 1660. Died May 18th, 1692. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-755" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-756" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Booker, astrologer (born 1603, died 1667); mentioned in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Hudibras</i>, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>, line 1093. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-756" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-757" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Eugene Maurice of Savoy, youngest son of Thomas of Savoy, by Marie de Bourbon, Countess of Soissons, whose title he inherited. He married Olympia Mancini, one of the nieces of Cardinal Mazarin, more than suspected of poisoning practices (like the Brinvilliers). His youngest son was the celebrated general, Prince Eugene of Savoy.—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-757" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-758" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The History of the thrice Illustrious Princess Henrietta Maria de Bourbon Queen of England. London 1660.</i> Dedicated “to the Paragon of Vertue and Beauty, her Grace the Dutchess of Aubemarle, <abbr>etc.</abbr>,” by John Dauncy. The dedication ends with the wish “that the Rising Sun of your Grace’s Vertues and Honours may still soar higher, but never know a declension.” <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-758" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-759" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Alderman Sir Richard Browne was one of the commissioners sent to Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> at Breda to desire his speedy return to England. See <a href="#note-248">note 248</a>. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-759" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-760" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Johannis Henrici Alstedii Encyclopædia</i>, 1630, bound in two volumes folio, is in the Pepysian Library. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-760" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-761" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Lord Hinchinbroke and Sidney Montagu. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-761" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-762" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>When the calendar was reformed in England by the act 24 <abbr>Geo.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <abbr>c.</abbr> 23, different provisions were made as regards those anniversaries which affect directly the rights of property and those which do not. Thus the old quarter days are still noted in our almanacs, and a curious survival of this is brought home to payers of income tax. The fiscal year still begins on old Lady-day, which now falls on April 6th. All ecclesiastical fasts and feasts and other commemorations which did not affect the rights of property were left on their nominal days, such as the execution of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> on January 30th and the restoration of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> on May 29th. The change of Lord Mayor’s day from the 29th of October to the 9th of November was not made by the act for reforming the calendar (<abbr>c.</abbr> 23), but by another act of the same session (<abbr>c.</abbr> 48), entitled “An Act for the Abbreviation of Michaelmas Term,” by which it was enacted, “that from and after the said feast of <abbr>St.</abbr> Michael, which shall be in the year 1752, the said solemnity of presenting and swearing the mayors of the city of London, after every annual election into the said office, in the manner and form heretofore used on the 29th day of October, shall be kept and observed on the ninth day of November in every year, unless the same shall fall on a Sunday, and in that case on the day following.” <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-762" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-763" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Officers of the Wardrobe. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-763" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-764" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Wife of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Davis, belonging to the Navy Office. The appellation of my Lady is used in the same sense as the French word Madame.—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-764" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-765" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Woman’s Prize, or Tamer Tamed</i>, a comedy by John Fletcher, and a sort of sequel to Shakespeare’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Taming of the Shrew</i>, published in the folio edition of Beaumont and Fletcher, 1647. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-765" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-766" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>At Walthamstow. <a href="../text/chapter-10.xhtml#noteref-766" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-767" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Pepys might well be anxious on this point, for in October of this year Phineas Pett, assistant master shipwright at Chatham, was dismissed from his post for having when a Child spoken disrespectfully of the King. See ante, August 23rd. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-767" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-768" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> Thomas Case, see ante, May 15th. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-768" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-769" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> Simeon Ash, one of the leading Presbyterian ministers. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-769" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-770" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Philip Nye, minister of Kimbolton and rector of Acton, Middlesex. He succeeded Daniel Featley in the latter living in 1642, and was turned out at the Restoration. He died in 1672. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-770" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-771" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Thomas Holliard or Hollier was appointed in 1638 surgeon for scald heads at <abbr>St.</abbr> Thomas’s Hospital, and on January 25th, 1643⁠–⁠4, he was chosen surgeon in place of Edward Molins. In 1670 his son of the same names was allowed to take his place during his illness. Ward, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diary</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 235, mentions that the porter at <abbr>St.</abbr> Thomas’s Hospital told him, in 1661, of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Holyard’s having cut thirty for the stone in one year, who all lived. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-771" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-772" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“<abbr>Nov.</abbr> 2. The Queen-mother and the Princess Henrietta came into London, the Queen having left this land nineteen years ago. Her coming was very private, Lambeth-way, where the King, Queen, and the Duke of York, and the rest, took water, crossed the Thames, and all safely arrived at Whitehall.</p>
						<cite>Rugge’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diurnal</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-772" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-773" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The bookseller’s, see ante, February 12th, 1659–60. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-773" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-774" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>St.</abbr> Olave’s, Hart Street. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-774" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-775" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Rimbault says that Father Smith built his organ in Westminster Abbey in 1662, and that it cost £120 (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Hopkins on the Organ</i>, 1855, <abbr>p.</abbr> 82). The organ which Pepys heard must therefore have been one put in temporarily. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-775" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-776" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>See ante, August 30th. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-776" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-777" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Henrietta</i> was formerly the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Lambert</i>, see ante, May 23rd. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-777" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-778" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The old-fashioned custom of sale by auction by inch of candle was continued in sales by the Admiralty to a somewhat late date. See September 3rd, 1662. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-778" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-779" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>To cry was to bid. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-779" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-780" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Borfett was Lord Sandwich’s chaplain, see ante, July 29th. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-780" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-781" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Afterwards Sir Stephen Fox, see ante, May 24th. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-781" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-782" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>William Lawes, elder brother of the more celebrated Henry Lawes, and educated under the same master, John Cooper. For a time he held the situation of a gentleman of the chapel, but at the outbreak of the Civil War he entered the royal army and obtained the rank of captain. He was killed at the siege of Chester, in 1645. Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> regretted his loss greatly, and went in to mourning for him. The chief work of Lawes was <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Choice Psalmes put into Musick for three voices</i>. The Psalms were set to the well-known paraphrase of Sandys, and this volume was published in 1648 by Henry Lawes. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-782" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-783" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“A Proclamation to restrain the abuses of Hackney Coaches in the Cities of London and Westminster and the Suburbs thereof.”</p>
						<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Notes and Queries</i>, First Series, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 122</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“In April, 1663, the poor widows of hackney-coachmen petitioned for some relief, as the parliament had reduced the number of coaches to 400; there were before, in and about London, more than 2,000.”</p>
						<cite>Rugge’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diurnal</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-783" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-784" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This Dutch pleasure boat is mentioned on August 15th, 1660 (see ante, 15th August 1660). On January 13th, 1660–61, Pepys comes to the conclusion that Rett’s yacht is much superior to the Dutch boat. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-784" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-785" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Montelion, the Prophetical Almanac for the year 1660, <abbr>8vo.</abbr>, with frontispiece, by John Phillips.</i> The Montelions for 1661 and 1662 were written by Thomas Flatman. It would appear that Pepys bought the Montelion for 1661. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-785" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-786" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Rump, or the Mirror of the late Times</i>, a comedy by John Tatham, acted at Dorset Court, and printed in 1660 and 1661. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-786" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-787" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The date of the origin of smoke-jacks does not appear to be known, but the first patent taken out for an improved smoke-jack by Peter Clare is dated December 24th, 1770. The smoke-jack consists of a wind-wheel fixed in the chimney, which communicates motion by means of an endless band to a pulley, whence the motion is transmitted to the spit by gearing. In the valuable introduction to the volume of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Abridgments of Specifications relating to Cooking, 1634⁠–⁠1866</i> (Patent Office), mention is made of an Italian work by Bartolomeo Scappi, published first at Rome in 1572, and afterwards reprinted at Venice in 1622, which gives a complete account of the kitchens of the time and the utensils used in them. In the plates several roasting-jacks are represented, one worked by smoke or hot air and one by a spring. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-787" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-788" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Painful, <abbr>i.e.</abbr> painstaking or laborious. Latimer speaks of the “painful magistrates.” <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-788" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-789" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.play" xml:lang="la">Cornelianum dolium</i> is a Latin comedy, by <abbr class="name">T. R.</abbr>, published at London in 1638. Douce attributed it to Thomas Randolph (<abbr>d.</abbr> 1635). The book has a frontispiece representing the sweating tub which, from the name of the patient, was styled Cornelius’s tub. There is a description of the play in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">European Magazine</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxvii</span> (1805), <abbr>p.</abbr> 343. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-789" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-789" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir Arnold Breames, Brahams, or Brames, of Bridge Court, Kent, was son of Charles Breames, of Dover, and was knighted at Canterbury, May 27th, 1660. He married, first, Joanna, daughter of Walter Henflete (or Septvans), secondly, Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Dudley Digges, Master of the Rolls, and thirdly, Margaret, daughter of Sir Thomas Palmer, of Wingham, <abbr class="eoc">Bart.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-789" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-791" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“The contract of bottomry is a negotiable instrument, which may be put in suit by the person to whom it is transferred; it is in use in all countries of maritime commerce and interests. A contract in the nature of a mortgage of a ship, when the owner of it borrows money to enable him to carry on the voyage, and pledges the keel or bottom of the ship as a security for the repayment. If the ship be lost the lender loses his whole money; but if it returns in safety, then he shall receive back his principal, and also the premium stipulated to be paid, however it may exceed the usual or legal rate of interest.”</p>
						<cite>Smyth’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sailor’s Word Book</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-791" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-792" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Rev.</abbr> John Turner, rector of Eynesbury. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-792" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-793" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Elizabeth Pickering, who married John Creed in 1668. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-793" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-794" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A celebrated place of entertainment in the Strand, by Temple Bar, largely associated with the fame of Ben Jonson. The Royal Society held its dinners here for many years. In 1787 <abbr>Messrs.</abbr> Child, the bankers, bought the freehold, and pulling the building down erected Child’s Place on the site. This was destroyed in 1879. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-794" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-795" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The lyre viol is a viol with extra open bass strings, holding the same relation to the viol as the theorbo does to the lute. A volume entitled <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Musick’s Recreation on the Lyra Viol</i>, was printed by John Playford in 1650. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-795" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-796" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“Elizabeth Woodcock, evidently his second wife, as his daughter Martha is often mentioned, married February 3rd, 1658–59, to Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten; and, secondly, in 1671, to a foreigner called, in the register of Battersea parish, Lord Leyonberg. Lady Leighenberg was buried at Walthamstow, September 16th, 1681.</p>
						<cite>Lysons’ <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Environs</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Sir James Barkman Leyenberg, the envoy from Sweden, was resident in England till 1682, or later. See January 21st, 1666–67. His name occurs in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">The Intelligencer</i>, March 12th, 1663–64, as delayed at Stockholm by a fever, though his despatches were ready. A hostile message appears to have passed between him and Pepys, in November, 1670, but the duel was prevented. Perhaps they quarrelled about the money due from Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten to Pepys, for which the widow was liable.—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-796" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-797" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Muscadine or muscadel, a rich sort of wine. <i xml:lang="la">Vinum muscatum quod moschi odorem referat.</i></p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“Quaffed off the muscadel, and threw the sops</span>
							<br/>
							<span>All in the sexton’s face.”</span>
						</p>
						<cite>Shakespeare, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Taming of the Shrew</i>, act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> <abbr>sc.</abbr> 2</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>—<abbr class="name">M.</abbr> <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-797" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-798" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>There is a token of the Leg in New Palace Yard, which was a famous tavern at this time (see <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Boyne’s Trade Tokens</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Williamson, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 1889, <abbr>p.</abbr> 684). <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-798" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-799" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Globe is given as one of the taverns in Comhill in the list of taverns in London and Westminster, 1698 (<abbr>Harl. MS.</abbr> 4716). <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-799" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-800" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This was Killigrew’s, or the King’s House, opened for the first time November 8th, 1660. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-800" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-801" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Beggar’s Bush</i>, a comedy by Beaumont and Fletcher, published in the 1647 edition of their plays. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-801" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-802" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Michael Mohun, or Moone, the celebrated actor, who had borne a major’s commission in the King’s army. The period of his death is uncertain, but he is known to have been dead in 1691. Downes relates that an eminent poet [Lee] seeing him act Mithridates</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“vented suddenly this saying: ‘Oh, Mohun, Mohun, thou little man of mettle, if I should write a 100, I’d write a part for thy mouth.’ ”</p>
						<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Roscius Anglicanus</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 17</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-802" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-803" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Cockpit at Whitehall. The plays at the Cockpit in Drury Lane were acted in the afternoon. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-803" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-804" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Singleton, appointed, 1660, one of the musicians of the sackbuts in place of William Lanier. From the sackbut he advanced to the violin, and lastly to the flute. He is mentioned by Dryden in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">MacFlecknoe</i>, and by Shadwell in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Bury Fair</i>. He was one of the King's twenty-four fiddlers in 1674; see North’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoirs of Musick</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Rimbault, 1846, <abbr>p.</abbr> 99 (note). He died 1686, and was buried (April 7th), in the churchyard of <abbr>St.</abbr> Paul’s, Covent Garden. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-804" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-805" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A hard, compact, black-green wood, obtained from <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Guaiacum officinale</i>, from which pestles, ship-blocks, rollers, castors, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, are turned. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-805" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-806" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cade was a stationer in Cornhill. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-806" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-807" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Pope’s Head Alley, a footway from Cornhill to Lombard Street, named after the Pope’s Head Tavern, was at this time famous for its cutlers. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-807" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-808" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A gorget or neckerchief worn by women at this time.</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“A woman’s neck whisk is used both plain and laced, and is called of most a gorget or falling whisk, because it falleth about the shoulders.”</p>
						<cite>Randle Holme (quoted by Planché)</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-808" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-809" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>There is a token of “Robert Chamberlaine at the Maypole in the Strand,” so that it may have been at this house that Pepys alighted (see <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Boyne’s Trade Tokens</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Williamson, <abbr>vol.</abbr> i<span epub:type="z3998:roman"></span>, 1889, <abbr>p.</abbr> 755). <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-809" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-810" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The King’s House, near Lincoln’s Inn Fields, see ante, November 20th. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-810" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-811" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Traitor</i>, a tragedy by James Shirley, licensed May 4th, 1631, and first printed in 1635. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-811" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-812" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Michael Mohun, see <a href="#note-802">note 802</a>. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-812" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-813" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Laud Crisp. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-813" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-814" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Henry Jermyn, second son of Sir Thomas Jermyn, born about 1604, created Baron Jermyn of <abbr>St.</abbr> Edmondsbury about 1643; advanced to the earldom of <abbr>St.</abbr> Albans, 1660, <abbr>K.G.</abbr> 1672. Died January 2nd, 1683–4. He was supposed to be married to the Queen Dowager, Henrietta Maria. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-814" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-815" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Wormwood (<i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Artemisia absinthium</i>) is celebrated for its intensely bitter, tonic, and stimulating qualities, which have caused it to be used in various medicinal preparations, and also in the making of liqueurs, as wormwood wine and <i xml:lang="fr">crême d’absinthe</i>. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-815" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-816" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Both these songs by Henry Lawes have been mentioned before. “Help, Help, O Help, Divinity of Love” (see June 5th, 1660). “O King of Heaven and Hell” (not “O God”) is the same as “Orpheus’ Hymn” (see March 4th, 1659–60). Henry Lawes was the friend of Milton and composed the music for <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Comus</i>, performed at Ludlow Castle in 1634. He set the anthem, “Zadok the Priest,” for the coronation of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. He died October 21st, 1662, and was buried in the Cloisters, Westminster Abbey. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-816" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-817" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Wilkins, <abbr>D.D.</abbr>, born 1614, took the Parliament side, and was made Warden of Wadham College, Oxford. In 1656 he married Robina, the widow of <abbr>Dr.</abbr> French and sister of Oliver Cromwell. He was appointed Master of Trinity College, Cambridge, in 1659, but was ejected in 1660. Consecrated Bishop of Chester, November 15th, 1668. He died November 19th, 1672. He was one of the founders of the Royal Society, and jokes were often made respecting the publication of his work, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Discovery of a New World</i>. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-817" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-818" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A comedy by Beaumont and Fletcher, first printed in 1616. After the Restoration it was one of the plays acted by Killigrew’s company. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-818" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-819" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>For “bill of imprest.” In Italian <i xml:lang="it">imprestare</i> means “to lend.” In the ancient accounts of persons officially employed by the crown, money advanced, paid on, account, was described as “de prestito,” or “in prestitis.”⁠—<abbr class="name">M.</abbr> <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-819" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-820" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Holland was secretary to Sir <abbr class="name">G.</abbr> Carteret, then Treasurer of the Navy, and was author of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A Brief Discourse on the Navy</i>, written in 1638. See July 25th, 1662. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-820" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-821" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The system of tickets afterwards gave great trouble, and caused much discontent.—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-821" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-822" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Henry Pinckney (sometimes called Major Pinckney) of the Three Squirrels in Fleet Street over against <abbr>St.</abbr> Dunstan’s Church. He was founder of the banking firm now known as <abbr>Messrs.</abbr> Goslings and Sharpe (see Hilton Price’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Handbook of London Bankers</i>, 1876, <abbr>p.</abbr> 63). He must not be confounded with Leonard Pinckney, one of the Four Tellers of the Receipt of the Exchequer. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-822" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-823" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>“The Fleece Tavern, in York Street, Covent Garden,” observes John Aubrey, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Miscellanies</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 31, “was very unfortunate for homicides; there have been several killed; three in my time. It is now (1692) a private house.” In Rugge’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diurnal</i> is the following entry: “<abbr>Nov.</abbr> 1660. One Sir John Gooscall was unfortunately killed in the Fleece Tavern, Covent Garden, by one Balendin, a Scotchman, who was taken, and committed to the Gatehouse in this month.” The tavern was on the west side of Bridges Street, about six doors south of Russell Street. If Aubrey did not blunder there may have been a back entrance from York Street. William Clifton was the keeper of the tavern. <a href="../text/chapter-11.xhtml#noteref-823" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-824" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Ben Jonson’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Epicœne</i>, first published in 1609. <a href="../text/chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-824" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-825" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The names of Cromwell, Ireton, and Bradshaw are not found in the Registers of Westminster Abbey. Colonel Chester, in his edition of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Registers</i> (<abbr>p.</abbr> 521), prints the royal warrant for a further exhumation of Commonwealth personages, dated September 9th, 1661. This warrant contains twenty-one names, and these bodies were re-interred on the green on the north side of the Abbey, between the north transept and the west end. <a href="../text/chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-825" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-826" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Killigrew’s house, see ante November 20th and 22nd, and above on the 4th of this month. Pepys sometimes calls it the Theatre and at others the Playhouse. <a href="../text/chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-826" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-827" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Falstaff was acted by Cartwright, but neither Downes nor Genest give the names of the actors who took the characters of Justice Shallow and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Caius. <a href="../text/chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-827" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-828" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Jonas Moore was born at Whitley, Lancashire, February 8th, 1617, and was appointed by Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> tutor to the Duke of York. Soon after the Restoration he was knighted and made Surveyor-General of the Ordnance. He was famous as a mathematician, and was one of the founders of the Royal Society. He died August 27th, 1679, and at his funeral sixty pieces of ordnance were discharged at the Tower. <a href="../text/chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-828" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-829" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>There were taverns with this sign in the Strand and Fleet Street. They are registered in the list of taverns in London and Westminster in 1698 (<abbr>Harl. MS.</abbr> 4716). <a href="../text/chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-829" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-830" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Middlesex Sessions House in <abbr>St.</abbr> John Street, Clerkenwell, named after Sir Baptist Hicks, one of the justices, and afterwards Viscount Campden, at whose cost it was built in 1612. The Sessions House was removed to the present building on Clerkenwell Green in 1782. <a href="../text/chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-830" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-831" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Crisp. <a href="../text/chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-831" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-832" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Which forms part of his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Church History</i>, book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>. <a href="../text/chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-832" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-833" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Artamène ou Le Grand Cyrus</i>, by Magdelaine de Scudéry, the second of her works, which was published in 1650. <a href="../text/chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-833" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-834" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>All instruments of the harpsichord and spinet kind were styled virginals. <a href="../text/chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-834" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-835" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Assurance</i> was a fourth-rate of forty guns, built at Deptford in 1646 by <abbr class="name">P.</abbr> Pett, <abbr class="eoc">sen.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-835" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-836" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Stoakes, late captain of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Royal Henry</i>. <a href="../text/chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-836" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-837" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Denham, son of Sir John Denham, Lord Chief Justice of the King’s Bench in Ireland, born at Dublin in 1615, appointed at the Restoration Surveyor-General of the Works, and created a Knight of the Bath at the Coronation of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>; better known as the author of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Cooper’s Hill</i>. He was one of the original Fellows of the Royal Society. His troubles with his second wife are related further on in the Diary. He died March, 1668–9, and was buried in Westminster Abbey. <a href="../text/chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-837" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-838" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Kennard was master-joiner at Whitehall, see February 11th, 1660–61. <a href="../text/chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-838" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-839" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Nothing further appears to have been done in respect to Sir Robert Slingsby’s scheme of an Order of Knights of the Sea. <a href="../text/chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-839" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-840" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Stocks originally stood on the site of the Mansion House. At this time the place was occupied by a market. <a href="../text/chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-840" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-841" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir Charles Berkeley, in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoirs of Grammont</i> improperly called Sir George Berkeley, created Baron Berkeley of Rathdown and Viscount Fitzharding of Bearhaven (in Ireland) in 1663, and Earl of Falmouth in 1665, was the confidant and favourite of the king. He was killed at Southwold Bay, in the seafight, June 2nd, 1665, and the earldom became extinct. The Duke of York had married Anne Hyde on the 3rd September before. <a href="../text/chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-841" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-842" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Pepys seems to have been let off very easily, for, by Act of Parliament 18 <abbr>Car.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <abbr>cap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> (1666), servants were to pay one shilling in the pound of their wages, and others from one shilling to three shillings in the pound. <a href="../text/chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-842" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-843" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>By the proclamation of January 27th, 1660–61, a double ducat was valued at 18<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> and a golden rider at £1 2<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> 6<abbr class="currency eoc">d.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-843" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-844" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Probably the Coffee House in Exchange Alley which had for its sign, Morat, or the Turk’s Head. It is frequently referred to in subsequent pages. <a href="../text/chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-844" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-845" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir Peter Buck was Clerk of the Cheque at Chatham before his appointment as Clerk of the Acts about 1600. He died in 1625, and was succeeded as Clerk of the Acts by Dennis Fleming. <a href="../text/chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-845" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-846" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Simon Beale is mentioned again on September 26th, 1668, where he is said to have been one of Oliver’s guards. <a href="../text/chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-846" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-847" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Henry Jermyn, second son of Thomas Jermyn and nephew of the Earl of <abbr>St.</abbr> Alban’s, born 1636; Master of the Horse to the Duke of York, 1660–1675; created Baron Dover of Dover, 1685, and Earl of Dover, 1689; succeeded as third Baron Jennyn of <abbr>St.</abbr> Edmondsbury, 1703. He died, April 6th, 1708. The report in the text was of course false. <a href="../text/chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-847" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-848" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Murrough O’Brien, sixth Baron of Inchiquin, in Ireland, advanced to the earldom of Inchiquin in 1654. <a href="../text/chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-848" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-849" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Afterwards Sir John Lawrence. <a href="../text/chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-849" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-850" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir Thomas Bond was a Roman Catholic Comptroller of the Household to the Queen Dowager; created a baronet in 1658 by Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, to whom, whilst in exile, he had advanced large sums. He died in 1685, and lies buried at Camberwell, in which parish he had purchased an estate at Peckham, and built a house alienated by his son, Sir Henry, to Chief Justice Trevor.—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-850" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-851" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Alexander Fraizer, <abbr>M.D.</abbr> (of Montpelier), was physician in ordinary to Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, and was knighted by the king, with whom he was a great favourite. In 1651 and 1652 he had been in attendance on the royal family at <abbr>St.</abbr> Germains. He died May 3rd, 1681. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Munk says, “His character was never of the highest.” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Roll of the Royal College of Physicians</i> 1878, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 232. <a href="../text/chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-851" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-852" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Princess Royal died on December 24th. <a href="../text/chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-852" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-853" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>William Warren, a rich tradesman of Wapping, was knighted in 1661, see post, April 17th, 1661. Le Neve says he was “a great builder of ships for King Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>.” A square built on the site of his residence was named “Sir William Warren’s Square.” <a href="../text/chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-853" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-854" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Shakespeare’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">King Henry <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span></i>, presumably the first part, is given by Downes as one of the plays acted by the King’s Servants, and he gives the following cast—“King: <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wintersel; Prince: <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Burt; Hotspur: <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hart; Falstaff: <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Cartwright; Poyns: <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shatterel.” <a href="../text/chapter-12.xhtml#noteref-854" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-855" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Will Wayneman appears by this to have been forgiven for his theft (see ante). He was dismissed on July 8th, 1663. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-855" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-856" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Or Princess Royal. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-856" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-857" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This was the rising of the Fifth Monarchy men under Thomas Venner. See post, January 7th, 1660–61. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-857" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-858" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Anthony Joyce, who married Kate Fenner. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-858" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-859" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Meat cut crosswise and broiled was said to be carboned. Falstaff says in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">King Henry <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span></i>, Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">L</span>, act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>, <abbr>sc.</abbr> 3, “Well, if Percy be alive, I’ll pierce him. If he do come in my way, so; if he do not, if I come in his willingly, let him make a carbonado of me.” <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-859" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-860" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Robert Barnwell died June, 1662. See June 4th. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-860" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-861" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The King dissolved the Convention Parliament on December 24th, 1660. The King’s and the Lord Chancellor’s speeches are printed in Cobbett’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Parliamentary History</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 170-78. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-861" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-862" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Trinity House was at Deptford. In 1671 the Corporation removed to Water Lane, and in 1795 to the present house on Tower Hill. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-862" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-863" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A comedy by Beaumont and Fletcher, acted at Whitehall in 1622, and published in 1647. It was revived in November, 1660. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-863" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-864" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Downes does not give the cast of this play. After the Restoration the acting of female characters by women became common. The first English professional actress was <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Coleman, who acted Ianthe in Davenant’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Siege of Rhodes</i>, at Rutland House in 1656. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-864" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-865" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Several of the Jewel Office rolls are in the British Museum. They recite all the sums of money given to the King, and the particulars of all the plate distributed in his name, as well as gloves and sweetmeats. The Museum possesses these rolls for the 4th, 9th, 18th, 30th, and 31st <abbr class="name">Eliz.</abbr>; for the 13th Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>; and the 23rd, 24th, 26th, and 27th of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-865" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-866" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A comedy by Beaumont and Fletcher, first published in 1616. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-866" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-867" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>William Joyce, brother of Anthony, married Mary Fenner. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-867" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-868" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Peter Beckford, who resided in <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Fuller’s neighbourhood. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Beckford, of Maidenhead, tailor, left two sons, one of whom, Thomas, a clothworker, became Sheriff of London, and was knighted on the 29th December, 1677. He is the slop-seller mentioned postea, February 21st, 1667–8. His brother, Peter Beckford, probably the person alluded to in January 1st, 1668–9, had a son of the same names, who rose to the rank of colonel in the army, having estates in Jamaica, and settling in that island. He became President of the Council there, in the latter part of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>’s reign; was made Governor and Commander-in-Chief by William <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, and died (1710) immensely rich. Governor Beckford had a son of the same names, who was father of the well-known Alderman Beckford, and grandfather of the author of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Vathek</i>. There is a token of a Peter Beckford in Field Lane, “at the Guy of Worick,” see <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Boyne’s Trade Tokens</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Williamson, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 1889, <abbr>p.</abbr> 598. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-868" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-869" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Fables of Æsop paraphrased in verse by John Ogilby, London, 1665</i>, a folio in vellum, is in the Pepysian Library. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-869" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-870" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The edition of Tully’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Offices</i> in the Pepysian Library is dated 1699. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-870" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-871" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“A great rising in the city of the Fifth-monarchy men, which did very much disturb the peace and liberty of the people, so that all the train-bands arose in arms, both in London and Westminster, as likewise all the king’s guards; and most of the noblemen mounted, and put all their servants on coach horses, for the defence of his Majesty, and the peace of his kingdom.”</p>
						<cite>Rugge’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diurnal</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>The notorious Thomas Venner, the Fifth-monarchy man, a cooper and preacher to a conventicle in Swan Alley, Coleman Street, with a small following (about fifty in number) took arms on the 6th January for the avowed purpose of establishing the Millennium. He was a violent enthusiast, and persuaded his followers that they were invulnerable. After exciting much alarm in the City, and skirmishing with the Trained Bands, they marched to Caen Wood. They were driven out by a party of guards, but again entered the City, where they were overpowered by the Trained Bands. The men were brought to trial and condemned; four, however, were acquitted and two reprieved. The execution of some of these men is mentioned by Pepys under date January 19th and 21st. “A Relation of the Arraignment and Trial of those who made the late Rebellious Insurrections in London, 1661,” is reprinted in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Somers’ Tracts</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span> (1812), <abbr>p.</abbr> 469. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-871" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-872" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Ben Jonson’s comedy. Pepys mentions the play before under date June 6th, 1660. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-872" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-873" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Widow</i>, a comedy by Ben Jonson, Fletcher, and Middleton, published in 1652. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-873" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-874" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>See ante, January 7th. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-874" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-875" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Hoop was in Thames Street, near London Bridge. It is registered in the list of taverns in London and Westminster in 169S (<abbr>Harl. MS.</abbr> 4716). <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-875" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-876" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Venner retreated with his followers to Caen Wood (there were about fifty). The extent of Caen Wood must not be estimated by the small portion now surrounding Lord Mansfield’s mansion. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-876" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-877" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>In the list of taverns in London and Westminster and ten miles round in 1698 (<abbr>Harl. MS.</abbr> 4716), the taverns at Deptford are given as the Castle, Angel, Swan, King’s Head, and Red Lion. The Globe is not mentioned. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-877" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-878" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The old expression for a brunette. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-878" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-879" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>And probably a relation, as Mary, daughter of Sir Henry Slingsby (cousin of the Comptroller) married Sir Walter Bethel, of Alne, Yorkshire. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-879" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-880" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Burnt wine was somewhat similar to mulled wine, and a favourite drink. It is remembered by Bishop Corbet’s witty message to Ben Jonson. Burnt wine is mentioned by Dickens in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Our Mutual Friend</i>, book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xiii</span>. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-880" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-881" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Dick Shore, now Duck Shore, Limehouse, is a landing place or stairs at the narrow street end of Fore Street. It is not far from the great turn of the river southward, opposite to the Isle of Dogs. Dick’s-Shore, Fore Street, Limehouse, and Dick’s-Shore Alley by Dick’s Shore, are both mentioned in Dodsley’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">London and its Environs</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 233, <abbr>edit.</abbr> 1761. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-881" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-882" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Peter Pett. The great shipbuilding family of Pett was chiefly connected with the growth of the English navy from the reign of Henry <span epun:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span> to that of William <span epun:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, but as the Christian names of Peter and Phineas appear to have been favourites in the family, it is very difficult to distinguish between some of them, and great confusion has been the result. Amongst the original Fellows of the Royal Society are mentioned Peter Pett, <abbr>Esq.</abbr>, and Sir Peter Pett. The former of these two was the Commissioner (see ante, <a href="#note-442">note 442</a>), and the latter was Advocate-General, and Fellow of All Souls College, Oxford. Peter Pett, <abbr>Esq.</abbr>, was the fifth son of Phineas Pett, “Master Shipwright to James <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>,” and was born in 1610. It is frequently stated that he was knighted, but this appears to be incorrect. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-882" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-883" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Christopher Pett was the eleventh child of Phineas Pett, “Master Shipwright to James <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>,” and was born May 14th, 1620. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-883" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-884" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Wife of Captain Arthur Browne, Sir William Batten’s brother-in-law. See February 14th, 1660–61, and for his death, April 27th, 1663. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-884" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-885" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Captain (afterwards Sir) Roger Cuttance. See <a href="#note-229">note 229</a>. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-885" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-886" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>To forsooth is to address in a polite and ceremonious manner.</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“Your city-mannerly word forsooth, use it not too often in any case.”</p>
						<cite>Ben Jonson’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Poetaster</i>, act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>, <abbr>sc.</abbr> 1</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-886" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-887" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Sovereign</i>, a first-rate of one hundred guns, was built at Woolwich, in 1657, by Captain Phineas Pett, <abbr class="eoc">sen.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-887" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-888" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Standing’s was in Fleet Street. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-888" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-889" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>There was a Greyhound tavern in Tower Street, of which a token exists (see <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Boyne’s Trade Tokens</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Williamson, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, 1889, <abbr>p.</abbr> 777). Pepys may refer to that, or more probably to the Greyhound in Fleet Street, see November 12th, 1662. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-889" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-890" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Thomas Venner and Roger Hodgkins were executed in Coleman Street; Giles Pritchard and William Oxman at the end of Wood Street. Others were executed in various parts of London. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-890" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-891" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A tragi-comedy, by Sir William Barclay, published in 1638. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-891" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-892" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This document is in the British Museum, <abbr>Add. MS.</abbr> 11,602, and consists of twenty-two closely printed pages. It is entitled, “A Discourse touching the Past and Present State of the Navy, composed by that Ingenious Gentleman, Sir Robert Slingsby, <abbr>Knt.</abbr> and Baronet, Comptroller thereof.”—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-892" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-893" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Mercer’s Hall and Chapel occupy the site of the ancient college or hospital of <abbr>St.</abbr> Thomas of Acon or Acres. These buildings were destroyed in the Great Fire, and rebuilt about 1672. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-893" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-894" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> established a Council of Trade “for keeping a control and superintendence upon the whole commerce of the nation” on November 7th, 1660. On December 1st of the same year he created a Council of Foreign Plantations. The two were united in 1672. The present Board of Trade was constituted in 1786. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-894" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-895" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Worthies of England</i> was published in 1662. During the Commonwealth period Fuller made a visit to the Committee of Sequestrations sitting at Waltham in Essex, when they talked about his remarkable memory, and he agreed to give them an example. “Gentlemen,” said he, “I will give you an instance of my memory in the particular business in which you are employed. Your worships have thought fit to sequester an honest but poor cavalier parson, my neighbour, from his living, and committed him to prison. He has a large family of children, and his circumstances are but indifferent. If you will please to release him out of prison, and restore him to his living, I will never forget the kindness while I live.” <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-895" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-896" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Many years ago, but within my recollection, it was said that a former Public Orator of Cambridge, when in a similar difficulty, used to begin his sentence with “<i xml:lang="la">Verum enimvero</i>.”—<abbr class="name">M.</abbr> <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-896" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-897" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Martha Batten was the daughter of Sir William Batten, and is frequently mentioned in the Diary. She married <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Castle. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-897" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-898" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Gresham College occupied the house of Sir Thomas Gresham, in Bishopsgate Street, from 1596, when Lady Gresham, Sir Thomas’s widow, died. The meeting which Pepys attended was an early one of the Royal Society, which was incorporated by royal charter in 1663. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-898" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-899" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The seventh edition of Francis Osborn’s works, <abbr>8vo.</abbr>, 1673, is in the Pepysian Library. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-899" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-900" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Patriarchæ, sive Christi Genealogia</i>, by Emmanuele Tesauro, published at London in 1651 and frequently reprinted. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-900" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-901" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Algernon Percy, Earl of Northumberland, held the office of Lord High Admiral from March, 1637, to June, 1642. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-901" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-902" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Richard Rooth, who commanded the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Dartmouth</i>—one of the ships which attended Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> on his return to England from Scheveling. He was knighted March 9th, 1675. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-902" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-903" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The surgeon and the purser. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-903" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-904" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>For a note on ribbons and garters at weddings, see <a href="#note-156">note 156</a>. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-904" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-905" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>“A Proclamation for the observation of the thirtieth of January as a day of Fast and Humiliation according to the late Act of Parliament for that purpose” is dated January 25th, 1660[–1661]. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-905" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-906" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“The bodies of Oliver Cromwell, Henry Ireton, John Bradshaw, and Thomas Pride, were dug up out of their graves to be hanged at Tyburn, and buried under the gallows. Cromwell’s vault having been opened, the people crowded very much to see him.”</p>
						<cite>Rugge’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diurnal</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Henry Ireton (born 1610) married Bridget, eldest daughter of Oliver Cromwell, <abbr>Jan.</abbr> 15th, 1646–7. He was afterwards one of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>’s judges, and one of the committee who superintended his execution. Lord Deputy ofIreland, 1650. He died at the siege of Limerick, November 26th, 1651. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-906" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-907" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Stubbes, speaking of the hats worn by the gentlemen of his day, says,</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“As the fashions be rare and strange, so are the things whereof their hats be made, diverse also; for some are of silk, some of velvet, some of taffety, some of sarcenet, some of wool, and which is more curious, some of a certain kind of fine hair.… these they call <em>bever</em> hats, of <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxx</span> or <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xl</span> shillings price, fetched from beyond the sea."</p>
						<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Anatomie of Abuses</i>, 1583.</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-907" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-908" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>At Apothecaries’ Hall, where Davenant produced the first and second parts of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Siege of Rhodes</i>. Downes says, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Roscius Anglicanus</i>, that Davenant’s company acted at “Pothecaries Hall” until the building in Lincoln’s Inn Fields was ready. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-908" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-909" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A comedy by Beaumont and Fletcher, first produced in 1623. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-909" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-910" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Margaret, daughter of Sir William Water, an alderman of York. She was mother of the Comptroller, and widow of Sir Guildford Slingsby. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-910" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-911" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Great James was in Bishopsgate Without. It is registered in the list of London taverns in 1698 (<abbr>Harl. MS.</abbr> 4716). <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-911" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-912" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“<abbr>Jan.</abbr> 30th was kept as a very solemn day of fasting and prayer. This morning the carcases of Cromwell, Ireton, and Bradshaw (which the day before had been brought from the Red Lion Inn, Holborn), were drawn upon a sledge to Tyburn, and then taken out of their coffins, and in their shrouds hanged by the neck, until the going down of the sun. They were then cut down, their heads taken off, and their bodies buried in a grave made under the gallows. The coffin in which was the body of Cromwell was a very rich thing, very full of gilded hinges and nails.”</p>
						<cite>Rugge’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diurnal</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-912" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-913" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The timber purchased from Warren (see ante, December 29th, 1660), sent to Lynn to be conveyed to Hinchinbroke as the barge was, mentioned June 20th, 1660. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-913" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-914" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A tragi-comedy by Henry Glapthome, founded on the story of the two lovers in Sydney’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Arcadia</i>, and published in 1639. <a href="../text/chapter-13.xhtml#noteref-914" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-915" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir Peter Ball, the Queen’s Attorney-General, and possessor of Brampton manor. <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-915" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-916" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This story relates to circumstances which had occurred many years previously. George, Lord Goring, was sent by Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> as Ambassador Extraordinary to France in 1644, to witness the oath of Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span> to the observance of the treaties concluded with England by his father, Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span>, and his grandfather, Henry <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span> took this oath at Ruel, on July 3rd, 1644, when he was not yet six years of age, and when his brother Philippe, then called Duke of Anjou, was not four years old. Shortly after his return home, Lord Goring was created, in September, 1644, Earl of Norwich, the title by which he is here mentioned. Philippe, Duke of Anjou, who was frightened by the English nobleman’s ugly faces, took the title of Duke of Orleans after the death of his uncle, Jean Baptiste Gaston, in 1660. He married his cousin, Henrietta of England.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-916" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-917" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir Philip Warwick, born 1608, secretary to Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> when in the Isle of Wight, and Clerk of the Signet, to which place he was restored in 1660; knighted, and elected <abbr>M.P.</abbr> for Westminster. He was also Secretary to the Treasury under Lord Southampton till 1667. Died January 15th, 1682–3. He wrote <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A Discourse on Government</i> and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoirs of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span></i>. His second wife, here mentioned, was Joan, daughter to Sir Henry Fanshawe, and widow of Sir William Botteler, <abbr class="eoc">Bart.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-917" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-918" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Marmaduke Darcy. See <a href="#note-474">note 474</a>. <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-918" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-919" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Benjamin Batten. <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-919" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-920" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Daniel Whistler, <abbr>M.D.</abbr>, Fellow of Merton College, whose inaugural dissertation on Rickets in 1645 contains the earliest printed account of that disease. He was Gresham Professor of Geometry, 1648⁠–⁠57, and held several offices at the College of Physicians, being elected President in 1683. He was one of the original Fellows of the Royal Society. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Munk, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Roll of the Royal College of Physicians</i>, speaks very unfavourably of Whistler, and says that he defrauded the college. He died May 11th, 1684. <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-920" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-921" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Thomas Wriothesley, fourth and last Earl of Southampton, <abbr>K.G.</abbr>, born 1607. He was one of the four who bore Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> to his burial. Burnet says, “he disdained to sell places.” He died May 16th, 1667. <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-921" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-922" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Cuttle, captain of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Hector</i>. <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-922" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-923" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Peter Mootham, captain of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Foresight</i>; afterwards slain in action. <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-923" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-924" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Long Parliament imposed a tax on merchants’ goods (called Algier Duty) for the redemption of captives in the Mediterranean. <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-924" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-925" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Dawes, created a baronet in 1663, father of Sir William Dawes, Archbishop of York. <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-925" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-926" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Or prison. <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-926" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-927" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>William Hewer. <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-927" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-928" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Salisbury Court Theatre, which was re-opened in 1660 by Rhodes’s company. <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-928" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-929" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A tragi-comedy by Beaumont and Fletcher, printed in the folio of 1647. <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-929" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-930" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“ ‘Telescope’ and ‘microscope’ are both as old as Milton, but for long while ‘perspective’ (glass being sometimes understood and sometimes expressed) did the work of these. It is sometimes written ‘prospective.’ Our present use of ‘perspective’ does not, I suppose, date farther back than Dryden.”</p>
						<cite>Trench’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Select Glossary</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>—<abbr class="name">M.</abbr> <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-930" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-931" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Adam Chard is mentioned previously in the Diary. See March 7th, 1659–60. <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-931" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-932" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>See ante, on the 9th of this month, where it is called Whitefriars. <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-932" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-933" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Beaumont and Fletcher’s comedy. See <a href="#note-866">note 866</a>. <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-933" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-934" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>According to Downes’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Roscius Anglicanus</i> the characters were taken as follows:—Elder Lovelace: Burt; Young Lovelace: Kynaston; Welford: Hart; Sir Roger: Lacy; The Lady: <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Marshall; Martha: <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Rutter; Abigail: <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Corey. <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-934" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-935" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The observation of <abbr>St.</abbr> Valentine’s day is very ancient in this country. Shakespeare makes Ophelia sing</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
						<p>
							<span>“Tomorrow is Saint Valentine’s day,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">All in the morning betime,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And I a maid at your window</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">To be your Valentine.”</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Hamlet</i>, act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> <abbr>sc.</abbr> 5</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>—<abbr class="name">M.</abbr> <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-935" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-936" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Martha Batten, Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten’s daughter. <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-936" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-937" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Captain Arthur Browne. See <a href="#note-884">note 884</a>. <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-937" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-938" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>“A Proclamation for restraint of killing, dressing, and eating of Flesh in Lent or on fish-dayes appointed by the law to be observed,” was dated 29th January, 1660⁠–⁠61. <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-938" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-939" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A tragedy by Massinger and Decker, printed in 1622. <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-939" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-940" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>More properly called “lustring”; a fine glossy silk. <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-940" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-941" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Prince de Ligne had no niece, and probably Pepys has made some mistake in the name. Charles at one time made an offer of marriage to Mazarin’s niece, Hortense Mancini. <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-941" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-942" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Henry Slingsby, Master of the Mint of Kilpax, near Leeds, member of the first Council of the Royal Society, named in Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>’s charter, dated April 22nd, 1663, but expelled from the Society January 24th, 1675. <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-942" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-943" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Peter Blondeau, medallist, was invited to London from Paris in 1649, and appointed by the Council of State to coin their money; but the moneyers succeeded in driving him out of the country. Soon after the Restoration he returned, and was appointed engineer to the mint. <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-943" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-944" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A comedy by Abraham Cowley, published in 1638. The scene was laid at Dunkirk. <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-944" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-945" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The harpsichord is an instrument larger than a spinet, with two or three strings to a note. <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-945" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-946" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Samuel Hartlib, son of a Polish merchant, and author of several ingenious works on agriculture, for which he received a pension from Cromwell. Milton’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tractate of Education</i> is addressed to him. Evelyn describes him in his Diary, November 27th, 1655, as “honest and learned,” and calls him “a public-spirited and ingenious person who had propagated many useful things and arts.” He lived in Axe Yard about 1661, and had a son named Samuel and a daughter, Nan, who married John Roder or Roth, afterwards knighted. Evelyn says that Claudius, referred to before (see July 10th, 1660, of this Diary), was Hartlib’s son-in-law. If so, Hartlib must have had another daughter. He seems to have been in some poverty at the end of his life. <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-946" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-947" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Steelyard was situated where Cannon Street Station now stands. The Rhenish wine-house occupied the ground floors of the front in Thames Street. <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-947" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-948" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Thomas, Earl of Ossory, <abbr>K.G.</abbr>, the accomplished son of the Duke of Ormond. Died 1680, aged forty-six. <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-948" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-949" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Duke of York’s marriage took place September 3rd, 1660. Anne Hyde was contracted to the Duke at Breda, November 24th, 1659. <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-949" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-950" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A tragedy, by Thomas Middleton, acted before the court at Whitehall, January 4th, 1623–4. The plot is taken from a story in Reynolds’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">God’s Revenge against Murder</i>, book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>hist.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-950" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-951" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Perhaps a letter of recommendation to some constituency. <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-951" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-952" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Randle Cotgrave’s valuable <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">French and English Dictionary</i> was first published in 1611, and several editions were subsequently issued. <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-952" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-953" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The cruel custom of throwing at cocks on Shrove Tuesday is of considerable antiquity. It is shown in the first print of Hogarth’s <i epub:type="se:nane.visual-art.engraving">Four Stages of Cruelty</i>. <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-953" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-954" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Christ’s College, Cambridge. <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-954" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-955" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>His son-in-law William Joyce. <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-955" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-956" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Hampshire</i> was a fourth-rate of thirty-eight guns, built at Deptford in 1653 by Phineas Pett. <a href="../text/chapter-14.xhtml#noteref-956" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-957" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Massinger’s play, which was first published in 1624. <a href="../text/chapter-15.xhtml#noteref-957" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-958" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Thomas Betterton, younger but eldest surviving son of Matthew Betterton of Westminster, said to be under-cook to Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, but who (writes Colonel Chester) described himself in his will as a “gentleman.” Thomas was baptized at <abbr>St.</abbr> Margaret’s, Westminster, August 11th, 1635. He joined the company of actors formed by Rhodes, bookseller (and formerly wardrobe keeper to the Blackfriars Company), which commenced to act at the Cockpit, in Drury Lane, in 1659. When, after the Restoration, Davenant took over Rhodes’s company, Betterton became his principal actor. Betterton died April 28th, 1710, and was buried in the East Cloister of Westminster Abbey on May 2nd. <a href="../text/chapter-15.xhtml#noteref-958" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-959" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir Paul Neile, of White Waltham, Berks, son of Richard Neile, Archbishop of York (1632–40). A member of the first council of the Royal Society, and a constant attendant at the meetings. He was frequently the bearer of messages from Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. We learn from Birch’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of the Royal Society</i>, that on July 17th, 1661, “Sir Paul Neile having mentioned that the king had within four days past desired to have a reason assigned why the sensitive plants stir and contract themselves upon being touched, it was resolved that <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Wilkins, <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Clarke, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Boyle, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Evelyn, and <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Goddard be curators for examining the fact relating to these plants.” <a href="../text/chapter-15.xhtml#noteref-959" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-960" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Love’s Mistress, or The Queen’s Masque</i>, by Thomas Haywood, published in 1636. The plot is borrowed from the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Golden Ass</i> of Apuleius. <a href="../text/chapter-15.xhtml#noteref-960" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-961" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Thomas Woodcock, afterwards ejected from <abbr>St.</abbr> Andrew’s Undershaft. <a href="../text/chapter-15.xhtml#noteref-961" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-962" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This report of the death of Cardinal Mazarin appears to have been premature, for he did not die until the 9th of March, 1661. <a href="../text/chapter-15.xhtml#noteref-962" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-963" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span>, son of Charles (<span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>) Gustavus. He succeeded his father in 1660. <a href="../text/chapter-15.xhtml#noteref-963" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-964" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><dfn>Wigg</dfn>, a kind of north country bun or teacake, still so called, to my knowledge, in Staffordshire.—<abbr class="name">M.</abbr> <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-15.xhtml#noteref-964" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-965" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Alderman and Colonel of the red regiment of Trainbands. He was one of the Commissioners sent to Breda to desire Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> to return to England immediately. <a href="../text/chapter-15.xhtml#noteref-965" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-966" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>When Pepys saw this play on March 1st he called it by its second title <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Queen’s Masque</i>. <a href="../text/chapter-15.xhtml#noteref-966" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-967" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A comedy by Beaumont and Fletcher, acted before the court in 1611 by the King’s Players. <a href="../text/chapter-15.xhtml#noteref-967" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-968" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Although Balthasar <abbr>St.</abbr> Michel, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Pepys’s brother, is frequently mentioned, there is no further notice of this lady in the Diary. <a href="../text/chapter-15.xhtml#noteref-968" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-969" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A comedy by Beaumont and Fletcher, acted before the court in 1622. <a href="../text/chapter-15.xhtml#noteref-969" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-970" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir William Batten was elected <abbr>M.P.</abbr> for Rochester March 21st, 1660–61, and held the seat till his death, when he was succeeded by Richard Head, Alderman of Rochester, who was elected November 2nd, 1667. <a href="../text/chapter-15.xhtml#noteref-970" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-971" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Duke of Anjou became Duke of Orleans on the death of his uncle Gaston in 1660. <a href="../text/chapter-15.xhtml#noteref-971" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-972" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir William Penn was well fitted to give this information, as it was he who took the island from the Spaniards in 1655. <a href="../text/chapter-15.xhtml#noteref-972" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-973" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The four members elected for London were Alderman John Fowke, Alderman William Love, John Jones, and Alderman Sir William Thompson. <a href="../text/chapter-15.xhtml#noteref-973" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-974" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Red Bull was situated in <abbr>St.</abbr> John’s Street, Clerkenwell. <a href="../text/chapter-15.xhtml#noteref-974" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-975" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A tragedy, by <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Rowley. <a href="../text/chapter-15.xhtml#noteref-975" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-976" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Probably Argal Baron, of Croydon, Lieutenant-Governor of Windsor Castle, and said to have been a distinguished Royalist.—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-15.xhtml#noteref-976" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-977" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Zachary Crofton, born in Ireland. His first living was at Wrenbury, Cheshire, from which he was expelled in 1648 for refusing to take the Engagement. When he came to London he was for sometime minister of <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s, Garlickhithe, and then obtained the cure of <abbr>St.</abbr> Botolph, Aldgate, which he held till he was ejected for Nonconformity. He was said to be zealous for the Restoration, but he was committed to the Tower for defending the Solemn League and Covenant. In 1667 he opened a school near Aldgate. He was the author of several works, and died in 1672. <a href="../text/chapter-15.xhtml#noteref-977" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-978" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Noise, see ante, May 7th, 1660. <a href="../text/chapter-15.xhtml#noteref-978" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-979" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Rollo, Duke of Normandy</i>, a tragedy by John Fletcher, published in 1640. It was previously published in 1639 as <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Bloody Brother</i>. <a href="../text/chapter-15.xhtml#noteref-979" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-980" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A Portuguese city on the Malabar or western coast of Hindostan. <a href="../text/chapter-15.xhtml#noteref-980" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-981" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The game was originally played in the road now styled Pall Mall, near <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s Square, but at the Restoration when sports came in fashion again the street was so much built over, that it became necessary to find another ground. The Mall in <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s Park was then laid out for the purpose. <a href="../text/chapter-16.xhtml#noteref-981" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-982" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The proverb, “A hair of the dog that bit you,” which probably had originally a literal meaning, has long been used to inculcate the advice of the two Sir Williams. <a href="../text/chapter-16.xhtml#noteref-982" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-983" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Traditions similar to that at Rochester, here alluded to, are to be found in other places in England. Sir Harry Englefield, in a communication made to the Society of Antiquaries, July 2nd, 1789, called attention to the curious popular tale preserved in the village of Hadstock, Essex, that the door of the church had been covered with the skin of a Danish pirate, who had plundered the church. At Worcester, likewise, it was asserted that the north doors of the cathedral had been covered with the skin of a person who had sacrilegiously robbed the high altar. The date of these doors appears to be the latter part of the fourteenth century, the north porch having been built about 1385. Dart, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of the Abbey Church of <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter’s, Westminster</i>, 1723 (<abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 64), relates a like tradition then preserved in reference to a door, one of three which closed off a chamber from the south transept⁠—namely, a certain building once known as the Chapel of Henry <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>, and used as a “Revestry.” This chamber, he states, “is inclosed with three doors, the inner cancellated, the middle, which is very thick, lined with skins like parchment, and driven full of nails. These skins, they by tradition tell us, were some skins of the Danes, tann’d and given here as a memorial of our delivery from them.” Portions of this supposed human skin were examined under the microscope by the late <abbr>Mr.</abbr> John Quekett of the Hunterian Museum, who ascertained, beyond question, that in each of the cases the skin was human. From a communication by the late <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Albert Way, <abbr>F.S.A.</abbr>, to the late Lord Braybrooke. <a href="../text/chapter-16.xhtml#noteref-983" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-984" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Shooter’s Hill, Kent, between the eighth and ninth milestones on the Dover road. It was long a notorious haunt of highwaymen. The custom was to leave the bodies of criminals hanging until the bones fell to the ground. <a href="../text/chapter-16.xhtml#noteref-984" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-985" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Foreigners were workmen dwelling outside the city. <a href="../text/chapter-16.xhtml#noteref-985" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-986" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The king in the early morning of the 22nd went from Whitehall to the Tower by water, so that he might proceed from thence through the City to Westminster Abbey, there to be crowned. <a href="../text/chapter-16.xhtml#noteref-986" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-987" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The members of the Navy Office appear to have chosen <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Young’s house on account of its nearness to the second triumphal arch, situated near the Royal Exchange, which was dedicated to the Navy. <a href="../text/chapter-16.xhtml#noteref-987" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-988" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Simon Wadlow was the original of “old Sir Simon the king,” the favourite air of Squire Western in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tom Jones</i>.</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“Hang up all the poor hop-drinkers,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Cries old Sim, the king of skinkers.”</span>
						</p>
						<cite>Ben Jonson, Verses over the door into the Apollo</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-16.xhtml#noteref-988" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-989" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><dfn>Mum</dfn>. Ale brewed with wheat at Brunswick.</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“Sedulous and stout</span>
							<br/>
							<span>With bowls of fattening <em>mum</em>.”</span>
						</p>
						<cite><abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Phillips, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Cyder</i>, <abbr>Vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> <abbr>p.</abbr> 231</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-16.xhtml#noteref-989" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-990" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Mary, third daughter of Oliver Cromwell, and second wife of Thomas Bellasis, second Viscount Fauconberg, created Earl of Fauconberg, April 9th, 1689. <a href="../text/chapter-16.xhtml#noteref-990" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-991" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Mond or orb of gold, with a cross set with precious stones, carried by the Duke of Buckingham. <a href="../text/chapter-16.xhtml#noteref-991" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-992" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>As yet barons had no coronet. A grant of that outward mark of dignity was made to them by Charles soon after his coronation. Queen Elizabeth had assigned coronets to viscounts.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-16.xhtml#noteref-992" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-993" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Pepys was himself one of the Barons of the Cinque Ports at the Coronation of James <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. <a href="../text/chapter-16.xhtml#noteref-993" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-994" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Dymock. <a href="../text/chapter-16.xhtml#noteref-994" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-995" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The terms of the Champion’s challenge were as follows: “If any person of what degree soever, high or low, shall deny or gainsay our Soveraigne Lord King Charles the Second, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, defender of the faith, Sonne and next heire to our Soveraigne Lord Charles the First, the last King deceased, to be right heire to the Imperiall Crowne of this Realme of England, or that bee ought not to enjoy the same; here is his champion, who sayth that he lyeth and is a false Traytor, being ready in person to combate with him, and in this quarrell will venture his life against him, on what day soever hee shall be appointed.” <a href="../text/chapter-16.xhtml#noteref-995" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-996" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Bishop Kennett gives a somewhat fuller account of this unseemly broil: “No sooner had the aforesaid Barons brought up the King to the foot of the stairs in Westminster Hall, ascending to his throne, and turned on the left hand (towards their own table) out of the way, but the King’s footmen most insolently and violently seized upon the canopy, which the Barons endeavouring to keep and defend, were by their number and strength dragged clown to the lower end of the Hall, nevertheless still keeping their hold; and had not <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Owen York Herald, being accidentally near the Hall door, and seeing the contest, caused the same to be shut, the footmen had certainly carried it away by force. But in the interim also (speedy notice hereof having been given the King) one of the Querries were sent from him, with command to imprison the footmen, and dismiss them out of his service, which put an end to the present disturbance. These footmen were also commanded to make their submission to the Court of Claims, which was accordingly done by them the 30th April following, and the canopy then delivered back to the said Barons.” Whilst this disturbance happened, the upper end of the first table, which had been appointed for the Barons of the Cinque Ports, was taken up by the Bishops, judges, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, probably nothing loth to take precedence of them; and the poor Barons, naturally unwilling to lose their dinner, were necessitated to eat it at the bottom of the second table, below the Masters of Chancery and others of the long robe.-<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-16.xhtml#noteref-996" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-997" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Chocolate was introduced into England about the year 1652. In the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Publick Advertiser</i> of Tuesday, June 16⁠–⁠22, 1657, we find the following; “In Bishopsgate Street in Queen’s Head Alley, at a Frenchman’s house, is an excellent West India drink called chocolate, to be sold, where you may have it ready at any time, and also unmade at reasonable rates.”⁠—<abbr class="name">M.</abbr> <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-16.xhtml#noteref-997" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-998" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A chamber is a small piece of ordnance. <a href="../text/chapter-16.xhtml#noteref-998" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-999" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The popular taste was formerly for sweet wines, and sugar was frequently mixed with the wine. <a href="../text/chapter-17.xhtml#noteref-999" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1000" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The dangers of shooting the bridge were so great that a popular proverb has it⁠—London Bridge was made for wise men to go over and fools to go under. <a href="../text/chapter-17.xhtml#noteref-1000" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1001" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> William Bates, one of the most eminent of the Puritan divines, and who took part in the Savoy Conference. His collected writings were published in 1700, and fill a large folio volume. The Dissenters called him silver-tongued Bates. Calamy affirmed that if Bates would have conformed to the Established Church he might have been raised to any bishopric in the kingdom. He died in 1699, aged seventy-four. <a href="../text/chapter-17.xhtml#noteref-1001" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1002" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Pepys here refers to the perambulation of parishes on Holy Thursday, still observed. This ceremony was sometimes enlivened by whipping the boys, for the better impressing on their minds the remembrance of the day, and the boundaries of the parish, instead of beating houses or stones. But this would not have harmonized well with the excellent Hooker’s practice on this day, when he “always dropped some loving and facetious observations, to be remembered against the next year, especially by the boys and young people.” Amongst Dorsetshire customs, it seems that, in perambulating a manor or parish, a boy is tossed into a stream, if that be the boundary; if a hedge, a sapling from it is applied for the purpose of flagellation.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-17.xhtml#noteref-1002" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1003" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“<dfn>Botarga</dfn>. The roe of the mullet pressed flat and dried; that of commerce, however, is from the tunny, a large fish of passage which is common in the Mediterranean. The best kind comes from Tunis.”</p>
						<cite>Smyth’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sailor’s Word-Book</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Botargo was chiefly used to promote drinking by causing thirst, and Rabelais makes Gargantua eat it. <a href="../text/chapter-18.xhtml#noteref-1003" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1004" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Parson? <a href="../text/chapter-18.xhtml#noteref-1004" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1005" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Katherine of Braganza, daughter of John <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> of Portugal, born 1638, married to Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, May 21st, 1662. After the death of the king she lived for some time at Somerset House, and then returned to Portugal, of which country she became Regent in 1704 on the retirement of her brother Don Pedro. She died December 31st, 1705. <a href="../text/chapter-18.xhtml#noteref-1005" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1006" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A Form of Prayer was published to be used in London on the 12th, and in the country on the 19th of June, being the special days appointed for a general fast to be kept in the respective places for averting those sicknesses and diseases, that dearth and scarcity, which justly may be feared from the late immoderate rain and waters: for a thanksgiving also for the blessed change of weather; and the begging the continuance of it to us for our comfort: And likewise for beseeching a Blessing upon the High Court of Parliament now assembled: Set forth by his Majesty’s authority. A sermon was preached before the Commons by Thomas Greenfield, preacher of Lincoln’s Inn. The Lords taxed themselves for the poor⁠—an earl, 30<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr>, a baron, 20<abbr class="currency eoc">s.</abbr> Those absent from prayers were to pay a forfeit.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-18.xhtml#noteref-1006" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1007" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A model. See October 5th. <a href="../text/chapter-18.xhtml#noteref-1007" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1008" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A woollen cloth. “Saye clothe serge.”⁠—Palsgrave. <a href="../text/chapter-18.xhtml#noteref-1008" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1009" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Comedy by Ben Jonson, first printed in 1612. <a href="../text/chapter-18.xhtml#noteref-1009" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1010" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Theodore Goodgroome, Pepys’s singing-master. He was probably related to John Goodgroome, a Gentleman of the Chapel Royal, who is also referred to in the Diary. <a href="../text/chapter-18.xhtml#noteref-1010" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1011" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Whilst a hat (see January 28th, 1660⁠–⁠61, ante) cost only 35<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> See also Lord Sandwich’s vexation at his beaver being stolen, and a hat only left in lieu of it, April 30th, 1661, ante; and April 19th and 26th, 1662, Post.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-18.xhtml#noteref-1011" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1012" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>It appears, from an old <abbr>MS.</abbr> account-book of the collections in the church of <abbr>St.</abbr> Olave, Hart Street, beginning in 1642, still extant, that the money gathered on the 30th June, 1661, “for several inhabitants of the parish of <abbr>St.</abbr> Dunstan in the West towards their losse by fire,” amounted to “<span epub:type="z3998:roman">xx</span> <abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span> <abbr class="currency">d.</abbr>” Pepys might complain of the trade in briefs, as similar contributions had been levied fourteen weeks successively, previous to the one in question at <abbr>St.</abbr> Olave’s church. Briefs were abolished in 1828.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-18.xhtml#noteref-1012" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1013" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Robert Pepys, of Brampton, who died on the following day. <a href="../text/chapter-19.xhtml#noteref-1013" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1014" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Hæmorrhoids or piles. <a href="../text/chapter-19.xhtml#noteref-1014" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1015" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Talbot Pepys, sixth son of John Pepys of Impington, was born 1583, and therefore at this time he was seventy-eight years of age. He was educated at Trinity Hall, Cambridge, and called to the bar at the Middle Temple in 1605. He was <abbr>M.P.</abbr> for Cambridge in 1625, and Recorder of Cambridge from 1624 to 1660, in which year he was succeeded by his son Roger. He died of the plague, March, 1666, aged eighty-three. <a href="../text/chapter-19.xhtml#noteref-1015" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1016" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>But not the porringer of silver. See May 29th, 1661.⁠—M. B <a href="../text/chapter-20.xhtml#noteref-1016" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1017" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A dealer in hides. <a href="../text/chapter-20.xhtml#noteref-1017" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1018" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A comedy acted at the Globe, and first printed in 1608. In the original entry in the Stationers’ books it is said to be by <abbr class="name">T. B.</abbr>, which may stand for Tony or Anthony Brewer. The play has been attributed without authority both to Shakespeare and to Drayton. <a href="../text/chapter-20.xhtml#noteref-1018" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1019" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Frances Butler and her sister. <a href="../text/chapter-20.xhtml#noteref-1019" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1020" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This “thing” was probably one of those large grants which Clarendon quietly, or, as he himself says, “without noise or scandal,” procured from the king. Besides lands and manors, Clarendon states at one time that the king gave him a “little billet into his hand, that contained a warrant of his own handwriting to Sir Stephen Fox to pay to the Chancellor the sum of £20,000 of which nobody could have notice.” In 1662 he received £5,000 out of the money voted to the king by the Parliament of Ireland, as he mentions in his vindication of himself against the impeachment of the Commons; and we shall see that Pepys, in February, 1664, names another sum of £20,000 given to the Chancellor to clear the mortgage upon Clarendon Park; and this last sum, it was believed, was paid from the money received from France by the sale of Dunkirk.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-20.xhtml#noteref-1020" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1021" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir William Davenant introduced the use of scenery. The character of Hamlet was one of Betterton’s masterpieces. Downes tells us that he was taught by Davenant how the part was acted by Taylor of the Blackfriars, who was instructed by Shakespeare himself. <a href="../text/chapter-20.xhtml#noteref-1021" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1022" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A voluntary contribution made by the subjects to their sovereign. Upon this occasion the clergy alone gave £33,743: See May 31st, 1661.⁠—B <a href="../text/chapter-20.xhtml#noteref-1022" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1023" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Lady Katherine Montagu, youngest daughter of Lord Sandwich, married, first, Nicholas Bacon, eldest son and heir of Sir Nicholas Bacon, <abbr>K.B.</abbr>, of Shrubland Hall, <abbr>co.</abbr> Suffolk; and, secondly, the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Balthazar Gardeman. She died January 15th, 1757, at ninety-six years, four months.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-21.xhtml#noteref-1023" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1024" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Pepys seldom liked any play of Shakespeare’s, and he sadly blundered when he supposed <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Twelfth Night</i> was a new play. <a href="../text/chapter-21.xhtml#noteref-1024" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1025" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“Two long boats that were made in Venice, called gondolas, were by the Duke of Venice (Dominico Contareni) presented to His Majesty; and the attending watermen, being four, were in very rich clothes, crimson satin; very big were their breeches and doublets; they wore also very large shirts of the same satin, very richly laced.”</p>
						<cite>Rugge’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diurnal</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-21.xhtml#noteref-1025" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1026" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The manorial court of Graveley, in Huntingdonshire, to which Impington owed suit or service, and under which the Pepys’s copyhold estates were held. See July 8th, 1661, ante.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-21.xhtml#noteref-1026" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1027" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Puckeridge, a village in Hertfordshire six and a half miles <abbr class="compass">N.N.E.</abbr>, of Ware. <a href="../text/chapter-21.xhtml#noteref-1027" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1028" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sturbridge fair is of great antiquity. The first trace of it is found in a charter granted about 1211 by King John to the Lepers of the Hospital of <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary Magdalen at Sturbridge by Cambridge, a fair to be held in the close of the hospital on the vigil and feast of the Holy Cross (see Cornelius Walford’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Fairs Past and Present</i>, 1883, <abbr>p.</abbr> 54). <a href="../text/chapter-21.xhtml#noteref-1028" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1029" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Bugden, or Buckden, a village and parish in the <abbr>St.</abbr> Neots district of Huntingdonshire, four miles <abbr class="compass">S.W.</abbr> of Huntingdon. <a href="../text/chapter-21.xhtml#noteref-1029" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1030" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Algiers. <a href="../text/chapter-21.xhtml#noteref-1030" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1031" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The antiquity of the cultivation of the melon is very remote. Both the melon (<i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy" xml:lang="la">cucumis melo</i>) and the watermelon (<i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy" xml:lang="la">cucumis citrullus</i>) were introduced into England at the end of the sixteenth century. See <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 228. <a href="../text/chapter-21.xhtml#noteref-1031" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1032" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Comte de Brienne insinuates, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoirs</i>, that Charles purposely abstained from interfering, in the belief that it was for his interest to let France and Spain quarrel, in order to further his own designs in the match with Portugal. Louis certainly held that opinion; and he afterwards instructed D’Estrades to solicit from the English court the punishment of those Londoners who had insulted his ambassador, and to demand the dismissal of De Batteville. Either no Londoner had interfered, or Louis’s demand had not in England the same force as in Spain; for no one was punished. The latter part of his request it was clearly not for Charles to entertain, much less enforce.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-21.xhtml#noteref-1032" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1033" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This place so often mentioned, was first given up to the English fleet under Lord Sandwich, by the Portuguese, January 30th, 1662; and Lord Peterborough left governor, with a garrison. The greatest pains were afterwards taken to preserve the fortress, and a fine mole was constructed at a vast expense, to improve the harbour. At length, after immense sums of money had been wasted there, the House of Commons expressed a dislike to the management of the garrison, which they suspected to be a nursery for a popish army, and seemed disinclined to maintain it any longer. The king consequently, in 1683, sent Lord Dartmouth to bring home the troops, and destroy the works; which he performed so effectually, that it would puzzle all our engineers to restore the harbour. It were idle to speculate on the benefits which might have accrued to England, by its preservation and retention; Tangier fell into the hands of the Moors, its importance having ceased, with the demolition of the mole. Many curious views of Tangier were taken by Hollar, during its occupation by the English; and his drawings are preserved in the British Museum. Some have been engraved by himself; but the impressions are of considerable rarity.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-21.xhtml#noteref-1033" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1034" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>To bloat is to dry by smoke, a method chiefly used to cure herrings or bloaters.</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“I have more smoke in my mouth than would blote a hundred herrings.”</p>
						<cite>Beaumont and Fletcher, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Island Princess</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“Why, you stink like so many bloat-herrings newly taken out of the chimney.”</p>
						<cite>Ben Jonson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Masque of Augurs</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-22.xhtml#noteref-1034" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1035" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Anger. <a href="../text/chapter-22.xhtml#noteref-1035" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1036" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir Robert Slingsby. <a href="../text/chapter-22.xhtml#noteref-1036" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1037" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The celebrated Quaker, and founder of Pennsylvania. <a href="../text/chapter-23.xhtml#noteref-1037" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1038" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A bull fight. See May 24th, 1662.⁠—B <a href="../text/chapter-23.xhtml#noteref-1038" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1039" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>And that, too, in the river Thames itself. The right of obliging ships of all nations to lower topsails, and strike their flag to the English, whilst in the British seas, and even on the French coasts, had, up to this time, been rigidly enforced. When Sully was sent by Henry <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, in 1603, to congratulate James <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> on his accession, and in a ship commanded by a vice-admiral of France, he was fired upon by the English Admiral Mansel, for daring to hoist the flag of France in the presence of that of England, although within sight of Calais. The French flag was lowered, and all Sully’s remonstrances could obtain no redress for the alleged injury. According to Rugge, Holmes had insisted upon the Swede’s lowering his flag, and had even fired a shot to enforce the observance of the usual tribute of respect, but the ambassador sent his secretary and another gentleman on board the English frigate, to assure the captain, <em>upon the word and honour of an ambassador</em>, that the king, by a verbal order, had given him leave and a dispensation in that particular, and upon this false representation he was allowed to proceed on his voyage without further question. This want of caution, and disobedience of orders, fell heavily on Holmes, who was imprisoned for two months, and not re-appointed to the same ship. Brahé afterwards made a proper submission for the fault he had committed, at his own court. His conduct reminds us of Sir Henry Wotton’s definition of an ambassador⁠—<em>that he is an honest man sent to lie abroad for the good of his country</em>. A pun upon the term lieger⁠—ambassador.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-23.xhtml#noteref-1039" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1040" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Fondness, foolishness.</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>“Fondness it were for any, being free,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To covet fetters, tho’ they golden be.”</span>
						</p>
						<cite>Spenser, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Sonnet 37</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>—<abbr class="name">M.</abbr> <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-23.xhtml#noteref-1040" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1041" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A mistake. According to the journals, £1,200,000. And see Diary, February 29th, 1663⁠–⁠64.⁠—<abbr class="name">M.</abbr> <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-23.xhtml#noteref-1041" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1042" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Major-General Edward Massey (or Massie), son of John Massie, was captain of one of the foot companies of the Irish Expedition, and had Oliver Cromwell as his ensign (see Peacock’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Army Lists in 1642</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 65). He was Governor of Gloucester in its obstinate defence against the royal forces, 1643; dismissed by the self-denying ordinance when he entered Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>’s service. He was taken prisoner at the battle of Worcester, September 3rd, 1651, but escaped abroad. <a href="../text/chapter-23.xhtml#noteref-1042" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1043" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This is a strange use of the word Tory, and an early one also. The word originally meant bogtrotters or wild Irish, and as Penn was Governor of Kildare these may have been some of his Irish followers. The term was not used politically until about 1679. <a href="../text/chapter-23.xhtml#noteref-1043" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1044" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sarah did not stay long with <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Pepys, who was continually falling out with her. She left to enter Sir William Penn’s service. <a href="../text/chapter-23.xhtml#noteref-1044" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1045" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>In a speech of Lord Lucas in the House of Lords, the 22nd February, 1670⁠–⁠1 (which speech was burnt by the common hangman), he thus adverted to that coin:</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“It is evident that there is scarcity of money; for all the parliament’s money called breeches (a fit stamp for the coin of the Rump) is wholly vanished⁠—the king’s proclamation and the Dutch have swept it all away, and of his now majesty’s coin there appears but very little; so that in effect we have none left for common use, but a little old lean coined money of the late three former princes. And what supply is preparing for it, my lords? I hear of none, unless it be of copper farthings, and this is the metal that is to vindicate, according to the inscription on it, the dominion of the four seas.”</p>
						<cite>Quoted in Penn’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memorials of Sir <abbr class="name">Wm.</abbr> Penn</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 264.</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-23.xhtml#noteref-1045" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1046" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>’s charter to the Company, confirming and extending the former charter, is dated April 3rd, 1661. Bombay, just acquired as part of Queen Katherine’s dowry, was made over to the Company by Letters Patent dated March 27th, 1669. <a href="../text/chapter-24.xhtml#noteref-1046" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1047" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>See a similar outrage, committed by Captain Ferrers, September 12th, 1662. Swords were usually worn by footmen. See May 4th, 1662, host.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-24.xhtml#noteref-1047" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1048" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><dfn>Cutter</dfn>, an old word for a rough swaggerer: hence the title of Cowley’s play. It was originally called <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Guardian</i>, when acted before Prince Charles at Trinity College, Cambridge, on March 12th, 1641. <a href="../text/chapter-24.xhtml#noteref-1048" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1049" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>“The wenches with their wassall bowls</span>
							<br/>
							<span>About the streets are singing.”</span>
						</p>
						<cite>Wither’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Christmas Carol</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>The old custom of carrying the wassail bowl from door to door, with songs and merriment, in Christmas week, is still observed in some of our rural districts.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-24.xhtml#noteref-1049" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1050" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Proved false. <a href="../text/chapter-25.xhtml#noteref-1050" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1051" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A kind of weir with floodgate, or a navigable sluice. This project is mentioned by Evelyn, January 16th, 1661⁠–⁠62, and Lysons’ “Environs” <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 392.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-25.xhtml#noteref-1051" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1052" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>As if they were a newly-married couple. <a href="../text/chapter-26.xhtml#noteref-1052" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1053" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The “poor john” is a hake salted and dried. It is frequently referred to in old authors as poor fare. <a href="../text/chapter-26.xhtml#noteref-1053" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1054" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>In Lent, of which the observance, intermitted for nineteen years, was now reviving. We have seen that Pepys, as yet, had not cast off all show of Puritanism.</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“In this month the Fishmongers’ Company petitioned the King that Lent might be kept, because they had provided abundance of fish for this season, and their prayer was granted.”</p>
						<cite>Rugge</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-26.xhtml#noteref-1054" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1055" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:diary">
						<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
							<p>“Sunday, <abbr>Jan.</abbr> 12. This morning, the Portuguese, 140 horse in Tangier, made a salley into the country for booty, whereof they had possessed about 400 cattle, 30 camels, and some horses, and 35 women and girls, and being six miles distant from Tangier, were intercepted by 100 Moors with harquebusses, who in the first charge killed the Aidill with a shot in the head, whereupon the rest of the Portuguese ran, and in the pursuit 51 were slain, whereof were 11 of the knights, besides the Aidill. The horses of the 51 were also taken by the Moors, and all the booty relieved.</p>
						</article>
						<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
							<p>“Tuesday, <abbr>Jan.</abbr> 14. This morning, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mules came to me from the Governor, for the assistance of some of our men into the castle.</p>
						</article>
						<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
							<p>“Thursday, <abbr>Jan.</abbr> 16. About 80 men out of my own ship, and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Princess</i>, went into Tangier, into the lower castle, about four of the clock in the afternoon.</p>
						</article>
						<article epub:type="z3998:diary-entry">
							<p>“Friday, <abbr>Jan.</abbr> 17. In the morning, by eight o’clock, the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Martyr</i> came in from Cales (Cadiz) with provisions, and about ten a clock I sent Sir Richard Stayner, with 120 men, besides officers, to the assistance of the Governor, into Tangier.”</p>
						</article>
						<cite>Lord Sandwich’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Journal</i>, in Kennet’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Register</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>On the 23rd, Lord Sandwich put one hundred more men into Tangier; on the 29th and 30th, Lord Peterborough and his garrison arrived from England, and received possession from the Portuguese; and, on the 31st, Sir Richard Stayner and the seamen re-embarked on board Lord Sandwich’s fleet.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-26.xhtml#noteref-1055" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1056" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Lord Braybrooke wrote, “This reminds me of a story of my father’s, when he was of Merton College, and heard Bowen the porter wish that he had £100 a-year, to enable him to keep a couple of hunters and a pack of foxhounds.” <a href="../text/chapter-27.xhtml#noteref-1056" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1057" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Although fumage or smoke money was as old as the Conquest, the first parliamentary levy of hearth or chimney money was by statute 13 and 14 <abbr>Car.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>c.</abbr> 10, which gave the king an hereditary revenue of two shillings annually upon every hearth in all houses paying church or poor rate. This act was repealed by statute <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> William and Mary, <abbr>c.</abbr> 10, it being declared in the preamble as “not only a great oppression to the poorer sort, but a badge of slavery upon the whole people, exposing every man’s house to be entered into and searched at pleasure by persons unknown to him.” <a href="../text/chapter-27.xhtml#noteref-1057" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1058" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>(“And hail the treason though we hate the traitor.”) On the 21st Charles returned his formal thanks to the States for their assistance in the matter.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-27.xhtml#noteref-1058" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1059" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Charles, when residing at Brussels, went to the Hague at night to pay a secret visit to his sister, the Princess of Orange. After his arrival, “an old reverend-like man, with a long grey beard and ordinary grey clothes,” entered the inn and begged for a private interview. He then fell on his knees, and pulling off his disguise, discovered himself to be <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Downing, then ambassador from Cromwell to the States-General. He informed Charles that the Dutch had guaranteed to the English Commonwealth to deliver him into their hands should he ever set foot in their territory. This warning probably saved Charles’s liberty.⁠—<abbr class="name">M.</abbr> <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-27.xhtml#noteref-1059" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1060" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This is the secret of Cornelius van Drebbel (1572⁠–⁠1634), which is referred to again by Pepys on November 11th, 1663. Johannes Siberius Kuffler was originally a dyer at Leyden, who married Drebbel’s daughter. In the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Calendar of State Papers, Domestic</i>, 1661⁠–⁠62 (<abbr>p.</abbr> 327), is the following entry: “Request of Johannes Siberius Kuffler and Jacob Drebble for a trial of their father Cornelius Drebble’s secret of sinking or destroying ships in a moment; and if it succeed, for a reward of £10,000. The secret was left them by will, to preserve for the English crown before any other state.” Cornelius van Drebbel settled in London, where he died. James <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> took some interest in him, and is said to have interfered when he was in prison in Austria and in danger of execution. <a href="../text/chapter-27.xhtml#noteref-1060" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1061" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A “pink” was a form of vessel now obsolete, and had a very narrow stern. The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Blackmoor</i> was a sixth-rate of twelve guns, built at Chatham by Captain Tayler in 1656. <a href="../text/chapter-27.xhtml#noteref-1061" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1062" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>One of these letters was probably from John Creed. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">S. J.</abbr> Davey, of 47, Great Russell Street, Bloomsbury, in 1889 had in his possession nine long letters from Creed to Pepys. In the first of these, dated from Lisbon, March, 1662, Creed wrote: “My Lord Embassador doth all he can to hasten the Queen’s Majestie’s embarquement, there being reasons enough against suffering any unnecessary delay.” There appear to have been considerable delays in the arrangements for the following declaration of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> was dated June 22nd, 1661: “Charles <abbr>R.</abbr> Whereas his <abbr>Maj.</abbr> is resolved to declare, under his Royall hand and seale, the most illustrious Lady Infanta of Portugall to be his lawfull wife, before the Treaty shall be signed by the King of Portugall; which is to be done only for the better expediting the marriage, without sending to Rome for a dispensation, which the laws of Portugall would require if the said most Illustrious Infanta were to be betrothed in that Kingdome,” <abbr>etc.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-27.xhtml#noteref-1062" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1063" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><dfn>Tansy</dfn> (<i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy" xml:lang="la">tanacetum</i>), a herb from which puddings were made. Hence any pudding of the kind. Selden (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Table Talk</i>) says: “Our tansies at Easter have reference to the bitter herbs.” See in Wordsworth’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">University Life in the Eighteenth Century</i> recipes for “an apple tansey,” “a bean tansey,” and “a gooseberry tansey.”⁠—<abbr class="name">M.</abbr> <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-27.xhtml#noteref-1063" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1064" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This does not accord with the certificate which <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Mines wrote in 1681, where he says that Pepys was a constant communicant. See Life of Pepys in <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>. <a href="../text/chapter-27.xhtml#noteref-1064" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1065" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>On the 5th of June following, Louis, notwithstanding the scarcity, gave that splendid carousal in the court before the Tuileries, from which the place has ever since taken its name.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-28.xhtml#noteref-1065" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1066" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Gough says,</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“It is the custom at this day all over Wales to strew the graves, both within and without the church, with green herbs, branches of box, flowers, rushes, and flags, for one year, after which such as can afford it lay down a stone.”</p>
						<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Brand’s Popular Antiquities</i>, edited <abbr class="name">W. C.</abbr> Hazlitt, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 218</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-28.xhtml#noteref-1066" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1067" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Principal officers of the navy, of which body Pepys was one as Clerk of the Acts. <a href="../text/chapter-28.xhtml#noteref-1067" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1068" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A saltcellar answering this description is preserved at the Tower. <a href="../text/chapter-28.xhtml#noteref-1068" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1069" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Royal Society. <a href="../text/chapter-28.xhtml#noteref-1069" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1070" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Owen, <abbr>D.D.</abbr>, a learned Nonconformist divine, and a voluminous theological writer, born 1616, made Dean of Christ Church in 1653 by the Parliament, and ejected in 1659⁠–⁠60. He died at Ealing in 1683. <a href="../text/chapter-28.xhtml#noteref-1070" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1071" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>William Penn, the celebrated Quaker. <a href="../text/chapter-28.xhtml#noteref-1071" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1072" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Mary, afterwards Queen of England. <a href="../text/chapter-29.xhtml#noteref-1072" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1073" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>According to the original Statutes of Corpus Christi <abbr>Coll.</abbr> Oxon, a Scholar slept in a truckle bed below each Fellow. Called also “a trindle bed.” Compare Hall’s description of an obsequious tutor:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i3">“He lieth in a truckle bed</span>
							<br/>
							<span>While his young master lieth o’er his head.”</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Satires</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 6, 5</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>The bed was drawn in the daytime under the high bed of the tutor. See Wordsworth’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">University Life in the Eighteenth Century</i>.⁠—<abbr class="name">M.</abbr> <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-29.xhtml#noteref-1073" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1074" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Tower Menagerie was not abolished until the reign of William <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. <a href="../text/chapter-29.xhtml#noteref-1074" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1075" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Miniature by Savill. <a href="../text/chapter-29.xhtml#noteref-1075" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1076" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Clerk of the Privy Seal. <a href="../text/chapter-29.xhtml#noteref-1076" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1077" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Nathaniel Crew, born 1633, fifth son of John, first Lord Crew; he himself became third Lord Crew in 1697. Sub-Rector of Lincoln College, Oxford, 1659. Took orders in 1664, and was Rector of Lincoln College in 1668; Dean of Chichester, 1669; Bishop of Oxford, 1671; Bishop of Durham, 1674; sworn of the Privy Council in 1676. He was very subservient to James <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, and at the Revolution was excepted from the general pardon of May, 1690, but he was allowed to keep possession of the bishopric of Durham. <a href="../text/chapter-29.xhtml#noteref-1077" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1078" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>To ears accustomed to the official words of speeches from the throne at the present day, the familiar tone of the following extracts from Charles’s speech to the Commons, on the 1st of March; will be amusing:</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“I will conclude with putting you in mind of the season of the year, and the convenience of your being in the country, in many respects, for the good and welfare of it; for you will find much tares have been sowed there in your absence. The arrival of my wife, who I expect some time this month, and the necessity of my own being out of town to meet her, and to stay some time before she comes hither, makes it very necessary that the Parliament be adjourned before Easter, to meet again in the winter.. … The mention of my wife’s arrival puts me in mind to desire you to put that compliment upon her, that her entrance into the town may be with more decency than the ways will now suffer it to be; and, to that purpose, I pray you would quickly pass such laws as are before you, in order to the amending those ways, and that she may not find Whitehall surrounded with water.”</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Such a bill passed the Commons on the 24th June. From Charles’s Speech, March 1st, 1662.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-29.xhtml#noteref-1078" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1079" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>For note on <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Davenport, who was deceived by a pretended marriage with the Earl of Oxford, see ante. Lord Oxford’s first wife died in 1659. He married, in 1672, his second wife, Diana Kirke, of whom nothing more need be said than that she bore an inappropriate Christian name. <a href="../text/chapter-29.xhtml#noteref-1079" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1080" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The dulcimer (or psaltery) consisted of a flat box, acting as a resonating chamber, over which strings of wire were stretched. These were struck by little hammers. <a href="../text/chapter-29.xhtml#noteref-1080" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1081" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Shaving with pumice stone. <a href="../text/chapter-29.xhtml#noteref-1081" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1082" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Farthingales had gone out of fashion in England during the reign of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, and therefore their use by the Portuguese ladies astonished the English. Evelyn also remarks in his Diary on this ugly custom (May 30th, 1662). <a href="../text/chapter-29.xhtml#noteref-1082" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1083" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Foxhall, Faukeshall, or Vauxhall, a manor in Surrey, properly Fulke’s. Hall, and so called from Fulke de Breaute, the notorious mercenary follower of King John. The manor house was afterwards known as Copped or Copt Hall. Sir Samuel Morland obtained a lease of the place, and King Charles made him Master of Mechanics, and here “he (Morland), anno 1667, built a fine room,” says Aubrey, “the inside all of looking-glass and fountains, very pleasant to behold.” The gardens were formed about 1661, and originally called the “New Spring Gardens,” to distinguish them from the “Old Spring Gardens” at Charing Cross, but according to the present description by Pepys there was both an Old and a New Spring Garden at Vauxhall. Balthazar Monconys, who visited England early in the reign of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, describes the “<span xml:lang="fr">Jardins Printemps</span>” at Lambeth as having lawns and gravel walks, dividing squares of twenty or thirty yards enclosed with hedges of gooseberry trees, within which were planted roses. <a href="../text/chapter-29.xhtml#noteref-1083" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1084" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Salt beef. <a href="../text/chapter-29.xhtml#noteref-1084" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1085" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“An Act for the Uniformity of public prayers and administration of sacraments and other rites and ceremonies, and for establishing the form of making, ordaining, and consecrating bishops, priests, and deacons in the Church of England.”</p>
						<cite>13 and 14 <abbr>Car.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>cap.</abbr> 4</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-29.xhtml#noteref-1085" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1086" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><dfn xml:lang="pt">Cruzado</dfn>, a Portuguese coin of 480 reis. It is named from a cross which it bears on one side, the arms of Portugal being on the other. It varied in value at different periods from 2<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> 3<abbr class="currency">d.</abbr> to 4<abbr class="currency eoc">s.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-30.xhtml#noteref-1086" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1087" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir Peter Ball was the Queen’s Attorney-General, and Evelyn mentions, in his Diary (January 11th, 1661⁠–⁠62), having received from him the draft of an act against the nuisance of the smoke of London. <a href="../text/chapter-30.xhtml#noteref-1087" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1088" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>There is a beautiful copy of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Workes of King Charles the Martyr, and Collections of Declarations, Treaties, <abbr>etc.</abbr></i> (2 <abbr>vols.</abbr> folio, 1662), in the Pepysian Library, with a very interesting note in the first volume by Pepys (dated October 7th, 1700), to the effect that he had collated it with a copy in Lambeth Library, presented by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Zachary Cradock, Provost of Eton. “This book being seized on board an English ship was delivered, by order of the Inquisition of Lisbon, to some of the English Priests to be perused and corrected according to the Rules of the <i xml:lang="la">Index Expurgatorius</i>. Thus corrected it was given to Barnaby Crafford, English merchant there, and by him it was given to me, the English preacher resident there <abbr class="era">A.D.</abbr> 1670, and by me as I then received it to the Library at Lambeth to be there preserved. <abbr>Nov.</abbr> 2, 1678. <i xml:lang="la">Ita testor</i>, <abbr class="name">Zach.</abbr> Cradock.⁠—From which (through the favour of the most Reverend Father in God and my most honoured Friend his Grace the present Archbishop of Canterbury) I have this 7th of October, 1700, had an opportunity given me there (assisted by my clerk, Thomas Henderson), leisurely to overlook, and with my uttermost attention to note the said Expurgations through each part of this my own Book.” Whole sentences in the book are struck through, as well as such words as Martyr, Defender of the Faith, More than Conqueror, <abbr>etc.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-30.xhtml#noteref-1088" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1089" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>That is, by the old style. The new style was not introduced until 1752. <a href="../text/chapter-30.xhtml#noteref-1089" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1090" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>Sir Harry Vane the younger was born 1612. Charles signed on June 12th a warrant for the execution of Vane by hanging at Tyburn on the 14th, which sentence on the following day “upon humble suit made” to him, Charles was “graciously pleased to mitigate,” as the warrant terms it, for the less ignominious punishment of beheading on Tower Hill, and with permission that the head and body should be given to the relations to be by them decently and privately interred.</p>
						<cite>Lister’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of Clarendon</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, 123</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-30.xhtml#noteref-1090" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1091" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>In 1662 was passed “An Act for providing of carriage by land and by water for the use of His Majesty’s Navy and Ordinance” (13⁠–⁠14 <abbr>Gar.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>cap.</abbr> 20), which gave power for impressing seamen, <abbr>etc.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-30.xhtml#noteref-1091" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1092" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Lord Barkeley of Stratton. <a href="../text/chapter-30.xhtml#noteref-1092" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1093" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Penn was Governor of Kinsale.-<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-30.xhtml#noteref-1093" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1094" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Mentioned elsewhere as “My cousin in Ireland.” He was son of Lord Chief Justice Richard Pepys. <a href="../text/chapter-30.xhtml#noteref-1094" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1095" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Pepys gives some particulars about the Chest on November 13th, 1662.</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“The Chest at Chatham was originally planned by Sir Francis Drake and Sir John Hawkins in 1588, after the defeat of the Armada; the seamen voluntarily agreed to have ‘defalked’ out of their wages certain sums to form a fund for relief. The property became considerable, as well as the abuses, and in 1802 the Chest was removed to Greenwich. In 1817, the stock amounted to £300,000 Consols.”</p>
						<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>Hist.</abbr> of Rochester</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 346</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-31.xhtml#noteref-1095" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1096" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The umbles are the liver, kidneys, and other portions of the inside of the deer. They were usually made into pies, and old cookery books contain directions for the making of “umble pies.” <a href="../text/chapter-31.xhtml#noteref-1096" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1097" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Lady Sandwich. <a href="../text/chapter-31.xhtml#noteref-1097" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1098" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The boy was born in June at Lady Castlemaine’s house in King Street. By the direction of Lord Castlemaine, who had become a Roman Catholic, the child was baptized by a priest, and this led to a final separation between husband and wife. Some days afterwards the child was again baptized by the rector of <abbr>St.</abbr> Margaret’s, Westminster, in presence of the godparents, the King, Aubrey De Vere, Earl of Oxford, and Barbara, Countess of Suffolk, first Lady of the Bedchamber to the Queen and Lady Castlemaine’s aunt. The entry in the register of <abbr>St.</abbr> Margaret’s is as follows: “1662 June 18 Charles Palmer L<sup>d</sup> Limbricke, <abbr>s.</abbr> to y<sup>e</sup> right honor<sup>ble</sup> Roger Earl of Castlemaine by Barbara” (Steinman’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoir of Barbara, Duchess of Cleveland</i>, 1871, <abbr>p.</abbr> 33). The child was afterwards called Charles Fitzroy, and was created Duke of Southampton in 1674. He succeeded his mother in the dukedom of Cleveland in 1709, and died 1730. <a href="../text/chapter-31.xhtml#noteref-1098" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1099" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“By the King’s command Lord Clarendon, much against his inclination, had twice visited his royal mistress with a view of inducing her, by persuasions which he could not justify, to give way to the King’s determination to have Lady Castlemaine of her household. … Lord Clarendon has given a full account of all that transpired between himself, the King and the Queen, on this very unpleasant business (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Continuation of Life of Clarendon</i>, 1759, <abbr>ff.</abbr> 168⁠–⁠178).”</p>
						<cite>Steinman’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoir of Duchess of Cleveland</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 35</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“The day at length arrived when Lady Castlemaine was to be formally admitted a Lady of the Bedchamber. The royal warrant, addressed to the Lord Chamberlain, bears date June 1, 1663, and includes with that of her ladyship, the names of the Duchess of Buckingham, the Countesses of Chesterfield and Bath, and the Countess Mareshall. A separate warrant of the same day directs his lordship to admit the Countess of Suffolk as Groom of the Stole and first Lady of the Bedchamber, to which undividable offices she had, with the additional ones of Mistress of the Robes and Keeper of the Privy Purse, been nominated by a warrant dated April 2, 1662, wherein the reception of her oath is expressly deferred until the Queen’s household shall be established. We here are furnished with the evidence that Charles would not sign the warrants for the five until Catherine had withdrawn her objection to his favourite one.”</p>
						<cite>Addenda to Steinman’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoir of Duchess of Cleveland</i> (privately printed), 1874, <abbr>p.</abbr> 1</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-31.xhtml#noteref-1099" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1100" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Pepys’s father was Alexander Marchant, <span xml:lang="fr">Sieur de <abbr>St.</abbr> Michel</span>, a scion of a good family in Anjou. Having turned Huguenot at the age of twenty-one, his father disinherited him, and he was left penniless. He came over in the retinue of Henrietta Maria, on her marriage with Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, as one of her Majesty’s gentlemen carvers, but the Queen dismissed him on finding out he was a Protestant and did not go to mass. He described himself as being captain and major of English troops in Italy and Flanders.</p>
						<cite>Wheatley’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Pepys and the World he lived in</i>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 6, 250</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>He was full of schemes; see September 22nd, 1663, for account of his patent for curing smoky chimneys. <a href="../text/chapter-31.xhtml#noteref-1100" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1101" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The game of shovelboard was played by two players (each provided with five coins) on a smooth heavy table. On the table were marked with chalk a series of lines, and the play was to strike the coin on the edge of the table with the hand so that it rested between these lines. Shakespeare uses the expression “shove-groat shilling,” as does Ben Jonson. These shillings were usually smooth and worn for the convenience of playing. Strutt says (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sports and Pastimes</i>), “I have seen a shovelboard table at a low public house in Benjamin Street, near Clerkenwell Green, which is about three feet in breadth and thirty-nine feet two inches in length, and said to be the longest at this time in London.” <a href="../text/chapter-31.xhtml#noteref-1101" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1102" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>When the first editions of this Diary were printed no note was required here. Before the erection of the present London Bridge the fall of water at the ebb tide was great, and to pass at that time was called “Shooting the bridge.” It was very hazardous for small boats. The ancient mode, even in Henry <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>’s time, of going to the Tower and Greenwich, was to land at the Three Cranes, in Upper Thames Street, suffer the barges to shoot the bridge, and to enter them again at Billingsgate. See Cavendish’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Wolsey</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 40, <abbr>ed.</abbr> 1852 <a href="../text/chapter-32.xhtml#noteref-1102" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1103" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Common Prayer Book of 1662, now in use. <a href="../text/chapter-32.xhtml#noteref-1103" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1104" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Thomas Gouge (1609⁠–⁠1681), an eminent Presbyterian minister, son of William Gouge, <abbr>D.D.</abbr> (lecturer at and afterwards Rector of <abbr>St.</abbr> Anne’s, Blackfriars). He was vicar of the parish of <abbr>St.</abbr> Sepulchre from 1638 until the Act of Uniformity, in 1662, forced him to resign his living. <a href="../text/chapter-32.xhtml#noteref-1104" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1105" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>On <abbr>St.</abbr> Bartholomew’s day, August 24th, 1662, the Act of Uniformity took effect, and about two hundred Presbyterian and Independent ministers lost their preferments. <a href="../text/chapter-32.xhtml#noteref-1105" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1106" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Off-square is evidently a mistake, in the shorthand <abbr>MS.</abbr>, for half square. <a href="../text/chapter-32.xhtml#noteref-1106" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1107" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A Moorish usurper, who had put himself at the head of an army for the purpose of attacking Tangier.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-32.xhtml#noteref-1107" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1108" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Thomas Povy, who had held, under Cromwell, a high situation in the Office of Plantations, was appointed in July, 1660, Treasurer and Receiver-General of the Rents and Revenues of James, Duke of York; but his royal master’s affairs falling into confusion, he surrendered his patent on the 27th July, 1668, for a consideration of £2,000. He was also First Treasurer for Tangier, which office he resigned to Pepys. Povy, had apartments at Whitehall, besides his lodgings in Lincoln’s Inn, and a villa near Hounslow, called the Priory, which he had inherited from Justinian Povy, who purchased it in 1625. He was one of the sons of Justinian Povy, Auditor-General to Queen Anne of Denmark in 1614, whose father was John Povy, citizen and embroiderer of London. <a href="../text/chapter-32.xhtml#noteref-1108" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1109" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A nickname given by the Dissenters to the Prayerbook. In <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Behn’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">City Heiress</i> (1682), Sir Anthony says to Sir Timothy, “You come from Church, too.” Sir Timothy replies, “Ay, needs must when the Devil drives⁠—I go to save my bacon, as they say, once a month, and that too after the Porridge is served up.” Scott quotes, in his notes to <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Woodstock</i>, a pamphlet entitled, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">Vindication of the Book of Common Prayer, against the contumelious Slanders of the Fanatic party terming it Porridge</i>. <a href="../text/chapter-32.xhtml#noteref-1109" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1110" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Cromwell had considered the 3rd of September as the most fortunate day of his life, on account of his victories at Dunbar and Worcester. It was also remarkable for the great storm that occurred at the time of his death; and as being the day on which the Fire of London, in 1666, burnt with the greatest fury.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-33.xhtml#noteref-1110" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1111" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Gilbert Sheldon, born July 19th, 1598; Fellow of All Souls, Oxford, 1622; Warden, 1635; Bishop of London, 1660⁠–⁠63; Archbishop of Canterbury, 1663. Died November 9th, 1677. <a href="../text/chapter-33.xhtml#noteref-1111" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1112" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>In 1583; the object of his mission being to persuade the Muscovite (Ivan <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> the Terrible) to a peace with John, King of Sweden. He was also employed to confirm the trade of the English with Russia, and having incurred some personal danger, was received with favour on his return by the Queen. He died in 1616. <a href="../text/chapter-33.xhtml#noteref-1112" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1113" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>James, the son of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> by Lucy Walter, daughter of William Walter, of Roch Castle, <abbrh>co.</abbrh> Pembroke. He was born April 9th, 1649, and landed in England with the Queen-Mother, July 28th, 1662, when he bore the name of Crofts, after Lord Crofts, his governor. He was created Duke of Monmouth, February 14th, 1663, and married Lady Anne Scott, daughter and heiress of Francis, second Earl of Buccleuch, on April 20th following. In 1673 he took the name of Scott, and was created Duke of Buccleuch. <a href="../text/chapter-33.xhtml#noteref-1113" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1114" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Epictetus, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Encheiridion</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 1: <span xml:lang="el">τῶν ὅντων τὰ μέν ἐστιν ὲφ’ ἡμῖν τὰ δε οῦκ</span> “Some things are in our power, others are not.” Pepys means, “I ought not to vex myself about what I cannot control.” <a href="../text/chapter-33.xhtml#noteref-1114" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1115" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> determined to form his own chapel on the model of that at Versailles. Twenty-four instrumentalists were engaged, and this was the first day upon which they were brought into requisition. Evelyn alludes to the change in his Diary, but he puts the date down as the 21st instead of the 14th. “Instead of the antient, grave and solemn wind musiq accompanying the organ, was introduc’d a concert of 24 violins between every pause after the French fantastical light way, better suiting a tavern or playhouse than a church. This was the first time of change, and now we no more heard the cornet which gave life to the organ, that instrument quite left off in which the English were so skilful.” A list of the twenty-four fiddlers in 1674, taken from an Exchequer document, “The names of the Gents of his Majesties Private Musick paid out of the Exchequer,” is printed in North’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoires of Musick</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Rimbault, 1846, <abbr>p.</abbr> 98 (note). <a href="../text/chapter-33.xhtml#noteref-1115" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1116" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Two acts were passed in 1662 for this purpose, <abbr>viz.</abbr>, 13 and 14 <abbr>Car.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> <abbr>cap.</abbr> 8: “An act for distribution of threescore thousand pounds amongst the truly loyal and indigent commission officers, and for assessing of offices and distributing the monies thereby raised for their further supply;” and <abbr>cap.</abbr> 9, “An act for the relief of poor and maimed officers and soldiers who have faithfully served his Majesty and his royal father in the late wars.” <a href="../text/chapter-33.xhtml#noteref-1116" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1117" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A lace band, the edges of which were indented with segments of circles, so as to resemble a scallop shell. The word “scallop” was used till recently for a part of a lady’s dress embroidered and cut to resemble a scallop shell. <a href="../text/chapter-34.xhtml#noteref-1117" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1118" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>That is, “undressing.” So of the French lords leaping over the walls in their shirts</p>
					<blockquote>
						<table epub:type="z3998:drama">
							<tr>
								<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alenc</td>
								<td>How now, my lords! what all unready so?</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Bast</td>
								<td>Unready! ay, and glad we ’scaped so well.</td>
							</tr>
						</table>
						<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Henry <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span></i>, act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, <abbr>sc.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>—<abbr class="name">M.</abbr> <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-34.xhtml#noteref-1118" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1119" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir Robert Bernard. <a href="../text/chapter-34.xhtml#noteref-1119" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1120" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A musical instrument with wire strings, and sounded with a plectrum; used as a bass to the cittern. The banjo is a modification of the bandore, as the name is a negro corruption of that word. <a href="../text/chapter-34.xhtml#noteref-1120" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1121" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A blast of trumpets, intended as a <i xml:lang="fr">reveillée</i>, from French <i xml:lang="fr">lever</i>.</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“First he that led the Cavalcade</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Wore a Sow-gelder’s Flagellet,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>On which he blew as strong a Levet</span>
							<br/>
							<span>As well-feed Lawyer on his breviate.”</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Hudibras</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span></span> <abbr>v.</abbr> 609</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-34.xhtml#noteref-1121" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1122" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The child was owned by neither of the royal brothers.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-34.xhtml#noteref-1122" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1123" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>A treaty was signed on the 27th October by which Dunkirk was sold to France for five million livres, two of which were to be paid immediately, and the remaining three by eight bills at dates varying from three months to two years; during which time the King of England was to contribute the aid of a naval force, if necessary, for defence against Spain. Subsequently the remaining three millions were reduced to 2,500,000 to be paid at Paris, and 254,000 in London. It is not known that Clarendon suggested the sale of Dunkirk, but it is certain that he adopted the measure with zeal. There is also no doubt that he got as much as France could be induced to give.</p>
						<cite>Lister’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of Clarendon</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 173⁠–⁠4</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-34.xhtml#noteref-1123" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1124" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The burial of Elizabeth, daughter of John Dekins or Dickens, is recorded in the parish register of All Hallows, Barking, as having taken place on October 22nd. See ante, October 3rd <a href="../text/chapter-34.xhtml#noteref-1124" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1125" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Lady Castlemaine. <a href="../text/chapter-34.xhtml#noteref-1125" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1126" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>There has been much confusion as to the name and parentage of Charles’s mistress. Lucy Walter was the daughter of William Walter of Roch Castle, <abbr>co.</abbr> Pembroke, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">S.</abbr> Steinman, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Althorp Memoirs</i> (privately printed, 1869), sets out her pedigree, which is a good one. Roch Castle was taken and burnt by the Parliamentary forces in 1644, and Lucy was in London in 1648, where she made the acquaintance of Colonel Algernon Sidney. She then fell into the possession of his brother, Colonel Robert Sidney. In September of this same year she was taken up by Charles, Prince of Wales. Charles terminated his connection with her on October 30th, 1651, and she died in 1658, as appears by a document (administration entry in the Register of the Prerogative Court) met with by the late Colonel Chester. William Erskine, who had served Charles as cupbearer in his wanderings, and was appointed Master of the Charterhouse in December, 1677, had the care of Lucy Walter, and buried her in Paris. He declared that the king never had any intention of marrying her, and she did not deserve it. Thomas Ross, the tutor of her son, put the idea of this claim into his head, and asked <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Cosin to certify to a marriage. In consequence of this he was removed from his office, and Lord Crofts took his place (Steinman’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Althorp Memoirs</i>). Lucy Walter took the name of Barlow during her wanderings. <a href="../text/chapter-34.xhtml#noteref-1126" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1127" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Intended for John Barkstead, Lieutenant of the Tower under Cromwell. Committed to the Tower (see March 17th, 1661⁠–⁠62). <a href="../text/chapter-34.xhtml#noteref-1127" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1128" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Lady Elizabeth Butler, daughter of James Butler, first Duke of Ormond, second wife of Philip Stanhope, second Earl of Chesterfield. She died July, 1665 (see <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoires de Grammont</i>, <abbr>chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>). Peter Cunningham thinks that this banishment was only temporary, for, according to the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Grammont Memoirs</i>, she was in town when the Russian ambassador was in London, December, 1662, and January, 1662⁠–⁠63. “It appears from the books of the Lord Steward’s office … that Lord Chesterfield set out for the country on the 12th May, 1663, and, from his ‘Short Notes’ referred to in the Memoirs before his Correspondence, that he remained at Bretby, in Derbyshire, with his wife, throughout the summer of that year” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Story of Nell Gwyn</i>, 1852, <abbr>p.</abbr> 189). <a href="../text/chapter-35.xhtml#noteref-1128" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1129" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Thus in the <abbr>MS.</abbr>, although the amount was first stated as £7,000 (see October 30th, 1662) <a href="../text/chapter-35.xhtml#noteref-1129" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1130" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Painstaking. <a href="../text/chapter-35.xhtml#noteref-1130" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1131" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span>, in 1624. <a href="../text/chapter-35.xhtml#noteref-1131" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1132" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Turkey or Levant Company was established in 1581. <a href="../text/chapter-35.xhtml#noteref-1132" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1133" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Gosnell. <a href="../text/chapter-35.xhtml#noteref-1133" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1134" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A <dfn>jacobus</dfn> was a gold coin of the value of twenty-five shillings, called after James <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, in whose reign it was first coined. <a href="../text/chapter-35.xhtml#noteref-1134" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1135" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Peter Blondeau was employed by the Commonwealth to coin their money. After the Restoration, November 3rd, 1662, he received letters of denization, and a grant for being engineer of the Mint in the Tower of London, and for using his new invention for coining gold and silver with the mill and press, with the fee of £100 per annum (Walpole’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Anecdotes of Painting</i>). <a href="../text/chapter-35.xhtml#noteref-1135" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1136" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>In two ordinances of the reign of Edward <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, printed in Riley’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memorials of London</i> (<abbr>pp.</abbr> 300, 389), this is called the “Carfukes,” which nearly approaches the name of the “Carfax,” at Oxford, where four ways also met. Pepys’s form of the word is nearer <i xml:lang="fr">quatre voies</i>, the French equivalent of <i xml:lang="la">quadrivium</i>. <a href="../text/chapter-35.xhtml#noteref-1136" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1137" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A small sea-vessel used in the Dutch herring-fishery. <a href="../text/chapter-35.xhtml#noteref-1137" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1138" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The French Protestant Church was founded by Edward <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span> in the church of <abbr>St.</abbr> Anthony’s Hospital in Threadneedle Street. This was destroyed in the Great Fire, and rebuilt, but demolished for the approaches of the new Royal Exchange. The church was then removed to <abbr>St.</abbr> Martin’s-le-Grand, but this was also removed in 1888 to make room for the new Post Office buildings. <a href="../text/chapter-35.xhtml#noteref-1138" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1139" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The fashion of men wearing muffs appears to have been introduced from France in this reign. <a href="../text/chapter-35.xhtml#noteref-1139" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1140" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The ancient name for Algiers. <a href="../text/chapter-35.xhtml#noteref-1140" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1141" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Iron skates appear to have been introduced by the Dutch, as the name certainly was; but we learn from Fitzstephen that bone skates (although not so called) were used in London in the twelfth century. <a href="../text/chapter-36.xhtml#noteref-1141" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1142" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Translated from the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Cid</i> of Corneille. <a href="../text/chapter-36.xhtml#noteref-1142" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1143" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Buttered ale must have been a horrible concoction, as it is described as ale boiled with lump sugar and spice. <a href="../text/chapter-36.xhtml#noteref-1143" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1144" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Fine for the imprisonment of Field (see February 4th, 1661⁠–⁠62, and October 21st, 1662). <a href="../text/chapter-36.xhtml#noteref-1144" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1145" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>James Crofts, son of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> by Lucy Walter, created Duke of Monmouth in 1663, Duke of Buccleuch in 1673, when he took the name of Scott. <a href="../text/chapter-36.xhtml#noteref-1145" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1146" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Bills of Mortality for London were first compiled by order of Thomas Cromwell about 1538, and the keeping of them was commenced by the Company of Parish Clerks in the great plague year of 1593. The bills were issued weekly from 1603. The charter of the Parish Clerks’ Company (1611) directs that “each parish clerk shall bring to the Clerks’ Hall weekly a note of all christenings and burials.” Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> in 1636 granted permission to the Parish Clerks to have a printing press and employ a printer in their hall for the purpose of printing their weekly bills. <a href="../text/chapter-36.xhtml#noteref-1146" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1147" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Boulogne. These pictures were given by George <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> to the Society of Antiquaries, who in return presented to the king a set of Thomas Hearne’s works, on large paper. The pictures were reclaimed by George <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, and are now at Hampton Court. They were exhibited in the Tudor Exhibition, 1890. <a href="../text/chapter-36.xhtml#noteref-1147" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1148" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The national Christmas dish of plum pudding is a modern evolution from plum porridge, which was probably similar to the dish still produced at Windsor Castle. <a href="../text/chapter-36.xhtml#noteref-1148" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1149" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The first edition of Butler’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.peom">Hudibras</i> is dated 1663, and it probably had only been published a few days when Pepys bought it and sold it at a loss. He subsequently endeavoured to appreciate the work, but was not successful. The edition in the Pepysian Library is dated 1689. <a href="../text/chapter-36.xhtml#noteref-1149" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1150" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>By moyre is meant mohair.-<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-36.xhtml#noteref-1150" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1151" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote xml:lang="fr">
						<p>“<dfn>Branle</dfn>. Espèce de danse de plusieurs personnes, qui se tiennent par la main, et qui se menent tour-à-tour.</p>
						<cite>
							<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dictionnaire de l’Académie</i>
						</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>A country dance mentioned by Shakespeare and other dramatists under the form of brawl, which word continued to be used in the eighteenth century.</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“My grave Lord Keeper led the brawls;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The seals and maces danced before him.”</span>
						</p>
						<cite>Gray, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">A Long Story</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-36.xhtml#noteref-1151" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1152" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Swift and lively. <a href="../text/chapter-36.xhtml#noteref-1152" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1153" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Lady Castlemaine. <a href="../text/chapter-37.xhtml#noteref-1153" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1154" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Scar-fire or scarefire. An alarm of fire. One of the little pieces in Herrick’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Hesperides</i> is entitled <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">The Scar-fire</i>, but the word sometimes was used, as in the text, for the fire itself. Fuller, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Worthies</i>, speaks of quenching scare-fires. <a href="../text/chapter-37.xhtml#noteref-1154" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1155" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Pepys saw <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Twelfth Night</i> for the first time on September 11th, 1661, when he supposed it was a new play, and “took no pleasure at all in it.” <a href="../text/chapter-37.xhtml#noteref-1155" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1156" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The usual word at this time for a lover. We have continued the correlative term “mistress,” but rejected that of “servant.” <a href="../text/chapter-37.xhtml#noteref-1156" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1157" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The construction of this Mole or breakwater turned out a very costly undertaking. In April, 1663, it was found that the charge for one year’s work was £13,000. In March, 1665, £36,000 had been spent upon it. The wind and sea exerted a very destructive influence over this structure, although it was very strongly built, and Colonel Norwood reported in 1668 that a breach had been made in the Mole, which cost a considerable sum to repair. <a href="../text/chapter-37.xhtml#noteref-1157" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1158" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Charles Pepys was second son of Thomas Pepys, elder brother of Samuel’s father. Samuel paid part of the legacy to Charles and his elder brother Thomas on May 25th, 1664. <a href="../text/chapter-37.xhtml#noteref-1158" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1159" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Citizen and grocer of London; most severely handled by Pope. Two statues were erected to his memory⁠—one in the College of Physicians, and the other in the Grocers’ Hall. They were erected and one removed (that in the College of Physicians) before Pope stigmatized “sage Cutler.” Pope says that Sir John Cutler had an only daughter; in fact, he had two: one married to Lord Radnor; the other, mentioned afterwards by Pepys, the wife of Sir William Portman.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-37.xhtml#noteref-1159" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1160" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>In earlier days Pepys noted for us each few pounds or shillings of graft which he annexed at each transaction in his office. <a href="../text/chapter-37.xhtml#noteref-1160" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1161" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>On the 20th of August, the Duc de Crequi, then French ambassador at Rome, was insulted by the Corsican armed police, a force whose ignoble duty it was to assist the Sbirri; and the pope, Alexander <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>, at first refused reparation for the affront offered to the French. Louis, as in the case of D’Estrades, took prompt measures. He ordered the papal nuncio forthwith to quit France; he seized upon Avignon, and his army prepared to enter Italy. Alexander found it necessary to submit. In fulfilment of a treaty signed at Pisa in 1664, Cardinal Chigi, the pope’s nephew, came to Paris, to tender the pope’s apology to Louis. The guilty individuals were punished; the Corsicans banished forever from the Roman States; and in front of the guardhouse which they had occupied a pyramid was erected, bearing an inscription which embodied the pope’s apology. This pyramid Louis permitted Clement <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span> to destroy on his accession.-<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-37.xhtml#noteref-1161" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1162" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Lorenzo Imperiali, of Genoa. He had been appointed Governor of Rome by Innocent <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>, and he had acted in that capacity at the time of the tumult.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-37.xhtml#noteref-1162" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1163" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Cardinal Mazarin died March 9th, 1661. <a href="../text/chapter-37.xhtml#noteref-1163" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1164" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><dfn>Ferrandin</dfn>, which was sometimes spelt farendon, was a stuff made of silk mixed with some other material, like what is now called poplin. Both mohair and farendon are generally cheap materials; for in the case of Manby <abbr>v.</abbr> Scott, decided in the Exchequer Chamber in 1663, and reported in the first volume of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Modern Reports</i>, the question being as to the liability of a husband to pay for goods supplied against his consent to his wife, who had separated from him, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Justice Hyde (whose judgment is most amusing) observes, in putting various supposed cases, that “The wife will have a velvet gown and a satin petticoat, and the husband thinks a mohair or farendon for a gown, and watered tabby for a petticoat, is as fashionable, and fitter for her quality.”⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-37.xhtml#noteref-1164" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1165" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Samuel, <abbr>chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxiv</span> <abbr>v.</abbr> 5, “And it came to pass afterward, that David’s heart smote him, because he had cut off Saul’s skirt.” <a href="../text/chapter-37.xhtml#noteref-1165" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1166" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The revels were held in the Inner Temple Hall. The last revel in any of the Inns of Court was held in the Inner Temple in 1733. <a href="../text/chapter-38.xhtml#noteref-1166" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1167" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Winifred Wells, maid of honour to the Queen, who figures in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Grammont Memoirs</i>. The king is supposed to have been father of the child. A similar adventure is told of Mary Kirke (afterwards married to Sir Thomas Vernon), who figures in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Grammont Memoirs</i> as Miss Warmestre. <a href="../text/chapter-38.xhtml#noteref-1167" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1168" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Stuart. <a href="../text/chapter-38.xhtml#noteref-1168" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1169" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Jane, wife of Lord Gerard (see ante, January 1st, 1662⁠–⁠63). The king had previously put a slight upon Lady Gerard, probably at the instigation of Lady Castlemaine, as the two ladies were not friends. On the 4th of January of this same year Lady Gerard had given a supper to the king and queen, when the king withdrew from the party and proceeded to the house of Lady Castlemaine, and remained there throughout the evening (see Steinman’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoir of Barbara, Duchess of Cleveland</i>, 1871, <abbr>p.</abbr> 47). <a href="../text/chapter-39.xhtml#noteref-1169" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1170" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Bewpers is the old name for bunting. <a href="../text/chapter-39.xhtml#noteref-1170" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1171" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>For ingenious. The distinction of the two words ingenious and ingenuous by which the former indicates mental, and the second moral qualities, was not made in Pepys’s day. <a href="../text/chapter-39.xhtml#noteref-1171" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1172" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ferrers. <a href="../text/chapter-39.xhtml#noteref-1172" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1173" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Colonel Williams⁠—“Cromwell that was”⁠—appears to have been Henry Cromwell, grandson of Sir Oliver Cromwell, and first cousin, once removed, to the Protector. He was seated at Bodsey House, in the parish of Ramsey, which had been his father’s residence, and held the commission of a colonel. He served in several Parliaments for Huntingdonshire, voting, in 1660, for the restoration of the monarchy; and as he knew the name of Cromwell would not be grateful to the Court, he disused it, and assumed that of Williams, which had belonged to his ancestors; and he is so styled in a list of knights of the proposed Order of the Royal Oak. He died at Huntingdon, 3rd August, 1673. (Abridged from Noble’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoirs of the Cromwells</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 70.)⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-39.xhtml#noteref-1173" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1174" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The thermometer was invented in the sixteenth century, but it is disputed who the inventor was. The claims of Santorio are supported by Borelli and Malpighi, while the title of Cornelius Drebbel is considered undoubted by Boerhaave. Galileo’s air thermometer, made before 1597, was the foundation of accurate thermometry. Galileo also invented the alcohol thermometer about 1611 or 1612. Spirit thermometers were made for the Accademia del Cimento, and described in the Memoirs of that academy. When the academy was dissolved by order of the Pope, some of these thermometers were packed away in a box, and were not discovered until early in the nineteenth century. Robert Hooke describes the manufacture and graduation of thermometers in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Micrographia</i> (1665). <a href="../text/chapter-39.xhtml#noteref-1174" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1175" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><dfn>Stemples</dfn>, cross pieces which are put into a frame of woodwork to cure and strengthen a shaft. <a href="../text/chapter-40.xhtml#noteref-1175" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1176" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A villain or scoundrel; the cant term for a thief. <a href="../text/chapter-40.xhtml#noteref-1176" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1177" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The company drove round and round the Ring in Hyde Park. The following two extracts illustrate this, and the second one shows how the circuit was called the Tour:</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“Here (1697) the people of fashion take the diversion of the Ring. In a pretty high place, which lies very open, they have surrounded a circumference of two or three hundred paces diameter with a sorry kind of balustrade, or rather with postes placed upon stakes but three feet from the ground; and the coaches drive round this. When they have turned for some time round one way they face about and turn t’other: so rowls the world!”</p>
						<cite>Wilson’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoirs</i>, 1719, <abbr>p.</abbr> 126</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“It is in this Park where the Grand Tour or Ring is kept for the Ladies to take the air in their coaches, and in fine weather I have seen above three hundred at a time.”</p>
						<cite>Macky’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Journey through England</i>, 1724, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 75</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-40.xhtml#noteref-1177" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1178" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Haut Brion, a claret; one of the first growths of the red wines of Medoc. <a href="../text/chapter-40.xhtml#noteref-1178" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1179" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Selden’s work was highly esteemed, and Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> made an order in council that a copy should be kept in the Council chest, another in the Court of Exchequer, and a third in the Court of Admiralty. The book Pepys refers to is Nedham’s translation, which was entitled, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Of the Dominion or Ownership of the Sea. Two Books … , written at first in Latin and entituled Mare Clausum, by John Selden. Translated into English by Marchamont Nedham. London, 1652</i>. This has the Commonwealth arms on the title-page and a dedication “To the Supreme Autoritie of the Nation-The Parliament of the Commonwealth of England.” The dedication to Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> in Selden’s original work was left out. Apparently a new title-page and dedication was prepared in 1663, but the copy in the British Museum, which formerly belonged to Charles Killigrew, does not contain these additions. <a href="../text/chapter-40.xhtml#noteref-1179" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1180" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A <dfn>salt eel</dfn> is a rope’s end cut from the piece to be used on the back of a culprit. “Yeow shall have salt eel for supper” is an emphatic threat. <a href="../text/chapter-40.xhtml#noteref-1180" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1181" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Pembleton, the dancing-master, made Pepys very jealous, and there are many allusions to him in the following pages. His lessons ceased on May 27th. <a href="../text/chapter-40.xhtml#noteref-1181" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1182" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Tower menagerie, with its famous lions, which was one of the chief sights of London, and gave rise to a new English word, was not abolished until the early part of the present century. <a href="../text/chapter-40.xhtml#noteref-1182" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1183" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>General Monk. <a href="../text/chapter-41.xhtml#noteref-1183" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1184" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>An allusion to Aretin’s infamous letters and sonnets accompanying the as infamous <i epub:type="se:name.visual-art.engraving">Postures</i> engraved by Marc Antonio from the designs of Julio Romano (Steinman’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoir of Barbara, Duchess of Cleveland</i>, privately printed, 1871). <a href="../text/chapter-41.xhtml#noteref-1184" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1185" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Thomas Ross, Monmouth’s tutor, put the idea into his head that Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> had married his mother. The report was sedulously spread abroad, and obtained some kind of credence, until, in June, 1678, the king set the matter at rest by publishing a declaration, which was entered in the Council book and registered in Chancery. The words of the declaration are: “That to avoid any dispute which might happen in time to come concerning the succession of the Crown, he (Charles) did declare, in the presence of Almighty God, that he never gave, nor made any contract of marriage, nor was married to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Barlow, alias Waters, the Duke of Monmouth’s mother, nor to any other woman whatsoever, but to his present wife, Queen Catherine, then living.” <a href="../text/chapter-41.xhtml#noteref-1185" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1186" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The conspiracy of Sir Charles Berkeley, Lord Arran, Jermyn, Talbot, and Killigrew to traduce Anne Hyde was peculiarly disgraceful, and the conduct of all the actors in the affair of the marriage, from Lord Clarendon downwards, was far from creditable (see Lister’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of Clarendon</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 68⁠–⁠79) <a href="../text/chapter-41.xhtml#noteref-1186" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1187" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The word chouse appears to have been introduced into the language at the beginning of the seventeenth century. In 1609, a Chiaus sent by Sir Robert Shirley, from Constantinople to London, had chiaused (or choused) the Turkish and Persian merchants out of £4,000, before the arrival of his employer, and had decamped. The affair was quite recent in 1610, when Jonson’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Alchemist</i> appeared, in which it is alluded to. <a href="../text/chapter-41.xhtml#noteref-1187" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1188" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The king said to ‘<span xml:lang="fr">la belle</span>’ Stuart, who resisted all his importunities, that he hoped he should live to see her “ugly and willing” (Lord Dartmouth’s note to Burnet’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Own Time</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 436, <abbr>ed.</abbr> 1823). <a href="../text/chapter-41.xhtml#noteref-1188" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1189" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Professor <abbr class="name">W. C.</abbr> Roberts-Austen, <abbr>C.B.</abbr>, <abbr>F.R.S.</abbr>, chemist to the Royal Mint, refers to Pepys’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diary</i> and to Blondeau’s machine in his Cantor Lectures on <i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">Alloys used for Coinage</i>, printed in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal of the Society of Arts</i> (<abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>). He writes, “The hammer was still retained for coining in the Mint in the Tower of London, but the question of the adoption of the screw-press by the Moneyers appears to have been revived in 1649, when the Council of State had it represented to them that the coins of the Government might be more perfectly and beautifully done, and made equal to any coins in Europe. It was proposed to send to France for Peter Blondeau, who had invented and improved a machine and method for making all coins ‘with the most beautiful polish and equality on the edge, or with any proper inscription or graining.’ He came on the 3rd of September, and although a Committee of the Mint reported in favour of his method of coining, the Company of Moneyers, who appear to have boasted of the success of their predecessors in opposing the introduction of the mill and screw-press in Queen Elizabeth’s reign, prevented the introduction of the machinery, and consequently he did not produce pattern pieces until 1653. … It is certain that Blondeau did not invent, but only improved the method of coining by the screw-press, and I believe his improvements related chiefly to a method for ‘rounding the pieces before they are sized, and in making the edges of the moneys with letters and graining,’ which he undertook to reveal to the king. Special stress is laid on the engines wherewith the rims were marked, ‘which might be kept secret among few men.’ I cannot find that there is any record in the Paris mint of Blondeau’s employment there, and the only reference to his invention in the Mint records of this country refers to the ‘collars,’ or perforated discs of metal surrounding the ‘blank’ while it was struck into a coin. There is, however, in the British Museum a MS. believed to be in Blondeau’s hand, in which he claims his process, ‘as a new invention, to make a handsome coyne, than can be found in all the world besides, <abbr>viz.</abbr>, that shall not only be stamped on both flat sides, but shall even be marked with letters on the thickness of the brim.’ The letters were raised. The press Blondeau used was, I believe, the ordinary screw-press, and I suppose that the presses drawn in Akerman’s well-known plate of the coining-room of the Mint in the Tower, published in 1803 [<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Microcosm of London</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 202], if not actually the same machines, were similar to those erected in 1661⁠–⁠62 by Sir William Parkhurst and Sir Anthony <abbr>St.</abbr> Leger, wardens of the Mint, at a cost of £1,400, Professor Roberts-Austen shows that Benvenuto Cellini used a similar press to that attributed to Blondeau, and he gives an illustration of this in his lecture (<abbr>p.</abbr> 810). In a letter to the editor the professor writes: “Pepys’s account of the operations of coining, and especially of assaying gold and silver, is very interesting and singularly accurate considering that he could not have had technical knowledge of the subject.” <a href="../text/chapter-41.xhtml#noteref-1189" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1190" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Commonwealth coins (stamped with the cross and harp, and the inscription, “The Commonwealth of England”) were called in by proclamation, September, 1660, and when brought to the Mint an equal amount of lawful money was allowed for them, weight for weight, deducting only for the coinage (Ruding’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Annals of the Coinage</i>, 18 19, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 293). The harp was taken out of the naval flags in May, 1660. <a href="../text/chapter-41.xhtml#noteref-1190" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1191" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>In the minutes of the Royal Society is the following entry: “June 11, 1662. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Pett’s brother showed a draught of the pleasure boat which he intended to make for the king” (Birch’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of the Royal Society</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 85). Peter Pett had already built a yacht for the king at Deptford. <a href="../text/chapter-41.xhtml#noteref-1191" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1192" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>16 <abbr>Car.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>cap.</abbr> 4, “An Act to prevent and suppresse seditious Conventicles.” It was enacted that anyone of the age of sixteen or upwards present at an unlawful assembly or conventicle was to incur fine or imprisonment. A conventicle was defined as an assembly of more than five persons besides the members of a family met together for holding worship not according to the rites of the Church of England. The act was amended 22 <abbr>Car.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>cap.</abbr> 1 (1670), and practically repealed by the Toleration Act of 1689, but the act 22 <abbr>Car.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>cap.</abbr> 1, was specially repealed 52 <abbr>Geo.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <abbr>cap.</abbr> 155, <abbr>s.</abbr> 1. <a href="../text/chapter-41.xhtml#noteref-1192" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1193" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Mary Moders, alias Stedman, a notorious impostor, who pretended to be a German princess. Her arrival as the German princess “at the Exchange Tavern, right against the Stocks betwixt the Poultry and Cornhill, at 5 in the morning. … , with her marriage to Carleton the taverner’s wife’s brother,” are incidents fully narrated in Francis Kirkman’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Counterfeit Lady Unveiled</i>, 1673 (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Boyne’s Tokens</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Williamson, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 703). Her adventures formed the plot of a tragicomedy by <abbr class="name">T. P.</abbr>, entitled <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">A Witty Combat, or the Female Victor</i>, 1663, which was acted with great applause by persons of quality in Whitsun week. Mary Carleton was tried at the Old Bailey for bigamy and acquitted, after which she appeared on the stage in her own character as the heroine of a play entitled <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The German Princess</i>. Pepys went to the Duke’s House to see her on April 15th, 1664. The rest of her life was one continued course of robbery and fraud, and in 1678 she was executed at Tyburn for stealing a piece of plate in Chancery Lane. <a href="../text/chapter-41.xhtml#noteref-1193" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1194" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This was known as “Blood’s Plot,” and was named after Colonel Thomas Blood, afterwards notorious for his desperate attack upon the Duke of Ormond in <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s Street (1670) and for his robbery of the crown jewels in the Tower (1671). He died August 24th, 1680. <a href="../text/chapter-42.xhtml#noteref-1194" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1195" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>It is necessary to note that this was according to the old style. <a href="../text/chapter-42.xhtml#noteref-1195" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1196" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Masks were commonly used by ladies in the reign of Elizabeth, and when their use was revived at the Restoration for respectable women attending the theatre, they became general. They soon, however, became the mark of loose women, and their use was discontinued by women of repute. On June 1st, 1704, a song was sung at the theatre in Lincoln’s Inn Fields called “The Misses’ Lamentation for want of their Vizard Masques at the Theatre.” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">R. W.</abbr> Lowe gives several references to the use of vizard masks at the theatre in his interesting biography, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Thomas Betterton</i>. <a href="../text/chapter-42.xhtml#noteref-1196" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1197" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Pepys continued through life an admirer of Chaucer, and we have the authority of Dryden himself for saying that we owe his character of the Good Parson to Pepys’s recommendation. <a href="../text/chapter-42.xhtml#noteref-1197" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1198" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“In 1664, there being a generall report all over the kingdom of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Monpesson his house being haunted, which hee himself affirming to the King and Queene to be true, the King sent the Lord Falmouth, and the Queene sent mee, to examine the truth of; but wee could neither see nor heare anything that was extraordinary; and about a year after, his Majesty told me that hee had discovered the cheat, and that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Monpesson, upon his Majesty sending for him, confessed it to him. And yet <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Monpesson, in a printed letter, had afterwards the confidence to deny that hee had ever made any such confession”</p>
						<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Letters of the Second Earl of Chesterfield</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 24, 1829, <abbr>8vo.</abbr></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Joseph Glanville published a relation of the famous disturbance at the house of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Monpesson, at Tedworth, Wilts, occasioned by the beating of an invisible drum every night for a year. This story, which was believed at the time, furnished the plot for Addison’s play of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Drummer</i>, or the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Haunted House</i>. In the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Mercurius Publicus</i>, April 16⁠–⁠23, 1663, there is a curious examination on this subject, by which it appears that one William Drury, of Uscut, Wilts, was the invisible drummer.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-42.xhtml#noteref-1198" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1199" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>In the same spirit, long after this, some question arising as to the best material to be used in building Westminster Bridge, Lord Chesterfield remarked, that there were too many wooden piers (peers) at Westminster already.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-42.xhtml#noteref-1199" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1200" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Paternoster Row, now famous as the headquarters of the publishing houses, was at this time chiefly inhabited by mercers. “This street, before the Fire of London, was taken up by eminent Mercers, Silkmen and Lacemen; and their shops were so resorted to by the nobility and gentry in their coaches, that oft times the street was so stop’d up that there was no passage for foot passengers” (Strype’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Stow</i>, book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 195) <a href="../text/chapter-42.xhtml#noteref-1200" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1201" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir William Rider’s house was known as Kirby Castle, and was supposed to have been built in 1570 by John Thorpe for John Kirby. It was associated in rhyme with other follies of the time in bricks and mortar, as recorded by Stow:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“Kirkebyes Castell, and Fisher’s Follie,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Spinila’s pleasure, and Megse’s glorie.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>The place was known in Strype’s time as the “Blind Beggar’s House,” but he knew nothing of the ballad, “The Beggar’s Daughter of Bednall Green,” for he remarks, “perhaps Kirby beggared himself by it.” Sir William Rider died at this house in 1669. <a href="../text/chapter-42.xhtml#noteref-1201" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1202" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>He was natural son of Philip <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, King of Spain, who, after his father’s death in 1665, exerted his whole influence to overthrow the Regency appointed during the young king’s minority.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-42.xhtml#noteref-1202" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1203" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The details in the original are very gross. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson relates the story in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lives of the Poets</i>, in his life of Sackville, Lord Dorset: “Sackville, who was then Lord Buckhurst, with Sir Charles Sedley and Sir Thomas Ogle, got drunk at the Cock, in Bow Street, by Covent Garden, and going into the balcony exposed themselves to the populace in very indecent postures. At last, as they grew warmer, Sedley stood forth naked, and harangued the populace in such profane language, that the publick indignation was awakened; the crowd attempted to force the door, and being repulsed, drove in the performers with stones, and broke the windows of the house. For this misdemeanour they were indicted, and Sedley was fined five hundred pounds; what was the sentence of the others is not known. Sedley employed [Henry] Killigrew and another to procure a remission from the King, but (mark the friendship of the dissolute!) they begged the fine for themselves, and exacted it to the last groat.” The woman known as Oxford Kate appears to have kept the notorious Cock Tavern in Bow Street at this date. <a href="../text/chapter-43.xhtml#noteref-1203" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1204" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This report of Don John’s death was not true. <a href="../text/chapter-43.xhtml#noteref-1204" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1205" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Antoine, Duc de Gramont, marshal of France, who died July 12th, 1678, aged seventy-four. His memoirs have been published. <a href="../text/chapter-43.xhtml#noteref-1205" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1206" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Cardinal Mazarin. <a href="../text/chapter-43.xhtml#noteref-1206" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1207" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Pepys may here refer either to Essay <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLI</span> (of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Fortune</i>) or to a chapter in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Advancement of Learning</i>. The sentence, “<i xml:lang="la">Faber quisque fortunæ propria</i>,” said to be by Appius Claudian, is quoted more than once in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">De Augmentis Scientiarum</i>, <abbr>lib.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>, <abbr>cap.</abbr> 2. <a href="../text/chapter-43.xhtml#noteref-1207" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1208" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Epsom medicinal wells were discovered about 1618, but they did not become fashionable until the Restoration. John Toland, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Description of Epsom</i>, says that he often counted seventy coaches in the Ring (the present racecourse on the Downs) on a Sunday evening; but by the end of the eighteenth century Epsom had entirely lost its vogue. <a href="../text/chapter-43.xhtml#noteref-1208" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1209" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A large birdcage, in which the birds can fly about; French <i xml:lang="fr">volière</i>. Ben Jonson uses the word volary. <a href="../text/chapter-44.xhtml#noteref-1209" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1210" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Lion Key, Lower Thames Street, where the famous Duchess of Suffolk in the time of Bishop Gardiner’s persecution took boat for the continent. James, Duke of York, also left the country from this same place on the night of April 20th, 1648, when he escaped from <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s Palace. <a href="../text/chapter-44.xhtml#noteref-1210" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1211" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>It was at this time that the Earl of <abbr>St.</abbr> Albans planned <abbr>St.</abbr> James’s Square, which was first styled “The Piazza.” The “Warrant for a grant to Baptist May and Abraham Cowley on nomination of the Earl of <abbr>St.</abbr> Albans of several parcels of ground in Pall Mall described, on rental of £80, for building thereon a square of 13 or 14 great and good houses,” was dated September 24th, 1664. <a href="../text/chapter-45.xhtml#noteref-1211" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1212" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Roger L’Estrange, a voluminous writer of pamphlets and periodical papers, and translator of classics, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> Born 1616. He was Licenser of the Press to Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> and James <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>; and <abbr>M.P.</abbr> for Winchester in James <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>’s parliament. L’Estrange was knighted in the reign of James <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, and died 1704. In 1663 L’Estrange set up a paper called <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">The Public Intelligencer</i>, which came out on August 31st, and continued to be published twice a week till January 19th, 1665, when it was superseded by the scheme of publishing the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">London Gazette</i>, the first number of which appeared on February 4th following. <a href="../text/chapter-45.xhtml#noteref-1212" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1213" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Bombay, which was transferred to the East India Company in 1669. The seat of the Western Presidency of India was removed from Surat to Bombay in 1685⁠–⁠87. <a href="../text/chapter-45.xhtml#noteref-1213" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1214" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Patent numbered 138 is printed in the appendix to Wheatley’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Samuel Pepys and the World he lived in</i> (<abbr>p.</abbr> 241). It is drawn in favour of John Colladon, Doctor in Physicke, and of Alexander Marchant, of <abbr>St.</abbr> Michall, and describes “a way to prevent and cure the smoakeing of Chimneys, either by stopping the tunnell towards the top, and altering the former course of the smoake, or by setting tunnells with checke within the chimneyes.” Sir Edward Ford’s name does not appear in the patent. <a href="../text/chapter-45.xhtml#noteref-1214" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1215" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>According to Collins, Henry Fitzroy, Lady Castlemaine’s second son by Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, was born on September 20th, 1663. He was the first Duke of Grafton.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-45.xhtml#noteref-1215" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1216" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Professor Silvanus <abbr class="name">P.</abbr> Thompson, <abbr>F.R.S.</abbr>, has kindly supplied me with the following interesting note on the terrella (or terella):</p>
					<p>The name given by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> William Gilbert, author of the famous treatise, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">De Magnete</i> (<abbr>Lond.</abbr> 1600), to a spherical loadstone, on account of its acting as a model, magnetically, of the earth; compass-needles pointing to its poles, as mariners’ compasses do to the poles of the earth. The term was adopted by other writers who followed Gilbert, as the following passage from <abbr class="name">Wm.</abbr> Barlowe’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Magneticall Advertisements</i> (<abbr>Lond.</abbr> 1616) shows: “Wherefore the round Loadstone is significantly termed by Doct. Gilbert Terrella, that is, a little, or rather a very little Earth: For it representeth in an exceeding small model (as it were) the admirable properties magneticall of the huge Globe of the earth” (<i xml:lang="la"><abbr>op. cit.</abbr></i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 55). Gilbert set great store by his invention of the terrella, since it led him to propound the true theory of the mariners’ compass. In his portrait of himself which he had painted for the University of Oxford he was represented as holding in his hand a globe inscribed <em>terella</em>. In the Galileo Museum in Florence there is a terrella twenty-seven inches in diameter, of loadstone from Elba, constructed for Cosmo de’ Medici. A smaller one contrived by Sir Christopher Wren was long preserved in the museum of the Royal Society (Grew’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Rarities belonging to the Royal Society</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 364). Evelyn was shown “a pretty terrella described with all y<sup>e</sup> circles and skewing all y<sup>e</sup> magnetic deviations” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diary</i>, July 3rd, 1655). <a href="../text/chapter-46.xhtml#noteref-1216" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1217" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“Naturally grown timber or bars of iron bent to a right angle or to fit the surfaces and to secure bodies firmly together as hanging knees secure the deck beams to the sides.”</p>
						<cite>Smyth’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sailor’s Word-Book</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>There are several kinds of knees. <a href="../text/chapter-46.xhtml#noteref-1217" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1218" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Pepys’s prescription for the colic:</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“Balsom of Sulphur, 3 or 4 drops in a spoonfull of Syrrup of Colts foote, not eating or drinking two hours before or after.</p>
						<p>“The making of this Balsom:</p>
						<p>“⅔ds of fine Oyle, and ⅓d of fine Brimstone, sett 13 or 14 houres upon y<sup>e</sup> fire, simpring till a thicke Stuffe lyes at y<sup>e</sup> Bottome, and y<sup>e</sup> Balsom at y<sup>e</sup> topp. Take this off <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
						<p>“Sir <abbr class="name">Rob.</abbr> Parkhurst for y<sup>e</sup> Collique.”</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>—<abbr class="name">M.</abbr> <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-46.xhtml#noteref-1218" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1219" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This is probably an allusion to the practice of not reporting the deaths of soldiers, that the officers might continue to draw their pay.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-46.xhtml#noteref-1219" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1220" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir William Compton (1625⁠–⁠1663) was knighted at Oxford, December 12th, 1643. He was called by Cromwell “the sober young man and the godly cavalier.” After the Restoration he was <abbr>M.P.</abbr> for Cambridge (1661), and appointed Master of the Ordnance. He died in Drury Lane, suddenly, as stated in the text, and was buried at Compton Wynyates, Warwickshire. <a href="../text/chapter-46.xhtml#noteref-1220" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1221" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“The queen was given over by her physicians, … , and the good nature of the king was much affected with the situation in which he saw! a princess whom, though he did not love her, yet he greatly esteemed. She loved him tenderly, and thinking that it was the last time she should ever speak to him, she told him ‘That the concern he showed for her death was enough to make her quit life with regret; but that not possessing charms sufficient to merit his tenderness, she had at least the consolation in dying to give place to a consort who might be more worthy, of it and to whom heaven, perhaps, might grant a blessing that had been refused to her.’ At these words she bathed his hands with some tears which he thought would be her last; he mingled his own with hers, and without supposing she would take him at his word, he conjured her to live for his sake.”</p>
						<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Grammont Memoirs</i>, <abbr>chap.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-46.xhtml#noteref-1221" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1222" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This may be the Coffee House in Exchange Alley, which had for a sign, Morat the Great, or The Great Turk, where coffee was sold in berry, in powder, and pounded in a mortar. There is a token of the house, see <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Boyne’s Tokens</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Williamson, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 592. <a href="../text/chapter-46.xhtml#noteref-1222" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1223" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir John Robinson. <a href="../text/chapter-46.xhtml#noteref-1223" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1224" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This refers to a rising in the West Riding of Yorkshire, which took place on October 12th, and was known as the Farneley Wood Plot. The rising was easily put down, and several prisoners were taken. A special commission of oyer and terminer was sent down to York to try the prisoners in January, 1663⁠–⁠64, when twenty-one were convicted and executed. (See Whitaker’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Loidis and Elmete</i>, 1816.) <a href="../text/chapter-46.xhtml#noteref-1224" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1225" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Leopold <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, the Holy Roman Emperor, was born June 9th, 1640. He became King of Hungary in 1655, and King of Bohemia in 1658, in which year he received the imperial crown. The Princes of the German Empire watched for some time the progress of his struggle with the Turks with indifference, but in 1663 they were induced to grant aid to Leopold after he had made a personal appeal to them in the diet at Ratisbon. <a href="../text/chapter-46.xhtml#noteref-1225" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1226" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The band succeeded the ruff as the ordinary civil costume. The lawyers, who now retain bands, and the clergy, who have only lately left them off, formerly wore ruffs. <a href="../text/chapter-46.xhtml#noteref-1226" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1227" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>As the practice of eating with forks gradually was introduced from Italy into England, napkins were not so generally used, but considered more as an ornament than a necessary.</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span class="i3">“The laudable use of forks,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Brought into custom here, as they are in Italy,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To the sparing of napkins.”</span>
						</p>
						<cite>Ben Jonson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Devil is an Ass</i>, act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>, <abbr>sc.</abbr> 3</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>The guests probably brought their own knife and fork with them in a case.⁠—M.<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-46.xhtml#noteref-1227" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1228" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A drink, composed usually of red wine, but sometimes of white, with the addition of sugar and spices. Sir Walter Scott (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Quarterly Review</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiii</span>) says, after quoting this passage of Pepys, “Assuredly his pieces of bacchanalian casuistry can only be matched by that of Fielding’s chaplain of Newgate, who preferred punch to wine, because the former was a liquor nowhere spoken against in Scripture.” <a href="../text/chapter-46.xhtml#noteref-1228" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1229" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The City plate was probably melted during the Civil War.-M.<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-46.xhtml#noteref-1229" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1230" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Shag was a stuff similar to plush. In 1703 a youth who was missing is described in an advertisement as wearing “red shag breeches, striped with black stripes.” (Planché’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Cyclopædia of Costume</i>). <a href="../text/chapter-46.xhtml#noteref-1230" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1231" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Defend is used in the sense of forbid. It is a Gallicism from the French <i xml:lang="fr">défendre</i>. <a href="../text/chapter-46.xhtml#noteref-1231" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1232" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir Edward Ford, son of Sir William Ford of Harting, born at Up Park in 1605.</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“After the Restoration he invented a mode of coining farthings. Each piece was to differ minutely from another to prevent forgery. He failed in procuring a patent for these in England, but obtained one for Ireland. He died in Ireland before he could carry his design into execution, on September 3rd, 1670.”</p>
						<cite>
							<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dictionary of National Biography</i>
						</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-47.xhtml#noteref-1232" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1233" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“ ‘Demurrage’ is the compensation due to a shipowner from a freighter for unduly decaying his vessel in port beyond the time specified in the charter-party or bill of lading. It is in fact an extended freight. A ship, unjustly detained as a prize is entitled to ‘demurrage.’ ”</p>
						<cite>Smyth’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sailor’s Word-Book</i>, 1867</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-47.xhtml#noteref-1233" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1234" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Hold. <a href="../text/chapter-47.xhtml#noteref-1234" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1235" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Bottomry. <a href="../text/chapter-47.xhtml#noteref-1235" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1236" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Old Style. <a href="../text/chapter-48.xhtml#noteref-1236" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1237" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Edward Dering was granted, August, 1660, “the office of King’s merchant in the East, for buying and providing necessaries for apparelling the Navy” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Calendar</i>, Domestic, 1660⁠–⁠61, <abbr>p.</abbr> 212). There is evidence among the State Papers of some dissatisfaction with the timber, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, which he supplied to the Navy, and at this time he appears to have had some stores left on his hands. <a href="../text/chapter-48.xhtml#noteref-1237" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1238" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>When Egerton was Bishop of Durham, he often played at bowls with his guests on the public days. On an occasion of this sort, a visitor happening to cross the lawn, one of the chaplains exclaimed, “You must not shake the green, for the bishop is going to bowl.”⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-49.xhtml#noteref-1238" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1239" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The three brothers, George Hamilton, James Hamilton, and the Count Antoine Hamilton, author of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Memoires de Grammont</i>. <a href="../text/chapter-49.xhtml#noteref-1239" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1240" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir George Ayscue or Askew. After his return from his imprisonment he declined to go to sea again, although he was twice afterwards formally appointed. He sat on the court-martial on the loss of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Defiance</i> in 1668. <a href="../text/chapter-49.xhtml#noteref-1240" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1241" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Francis Osborne, an English writer of considerable abilities and popularity, was the author of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Advice to a Son</i>, in two parts, Oxford, 1656⁠–⁠8, <abbr class="eoc">8vo.</abbr> He died in 1659. He is the same person mentioned as <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">My Father Osborne</i>, October 19th, 1661.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-49.xhtml#noteref-1241" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1242" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> followed his brother in the use of the periwig in the following April. <a href="../text/chapter-50.xhtml#noteref-1242" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1243" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Earl of Sandwich had just moved to a house in Lincoln’s Inn Fields. Elizabeth Dickering, who afterwards married John Creed, was niece to Lord Sandwich. <a href="../text/chapter-50.xhtml#noteref-1243" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1244" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The tables at which the king dined in public.-<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-50.xhtml#noteref-1244" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1245" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A committee was appointed in September, 1660, to consider the subject of the King’s revenue, and they “reported to the Commons that the average revenue of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, from 1637 to 1641 inclusive, had been £895,819, and the average expenditure about £1,110,000. At that time prices were lower and the country less burdened with navy and garrisons, among which latter Dunkirk alone now cost more than £100,000 a year. It appeared, therefore, that the least sum to which the King could be expected to ‘conform his expense’ was £1,200,000.” Burnet writes, “It was believed that if two millions had been asked he could have carried it. But he (Clarendon) had no mind to put the King out of the necessity of having recourse to his Parliament.”⁠—Lister’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of Clarendon</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 22, 23. <a href="../text/chapter-50.xhtml#noteref-1245" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1246" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Many attempts to produce a satisfactory revolver were made in former centuries, but it was not till the present one that Colt’s revolver was invented. On February 18th, 1661, Edward, Marquis of Worcester, obtained Letters Patent for “an invencon to make certeyne guns or pistolls which in the tenth parte of one minute of an houre may, with a flaske contrived to that purpose, be recharged the fourth part of one turne of the barrell which remaines still fixt, fastening it as forceably and effectually as a dozen thrids of any scrue, which in the ordinary and usual way require as many turnes.” On March 3rd, 1664, Abraham Hill obtained Letters Patent for a “gun or pistoll for small shott, carrying seaven or eight charges of the same in the stocke of the gun.” <a href="../text/chapter-51.xhtml#noteref-1246" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1247" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Building by John Webb; now a part of Greenwich Hospital. Evelyn wrote in his Diary, October 19th, 1661: “I went to London to visite my Lord of Bristoll, having been with Sir John Denham (his Ma<sup>ties</sup> surveyor) to consult with him about the placing of his palace at Greenwich, which I would have had built between the river and the Queene’s house, so as a large cutt should have let in y<sup>e</sup> Thames like a bay; but Sir John was for setting it in piles at the very brink of the water, which I did not assent to and so came away, knowing Sir John to be a better poet than architect, tho’ he had <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Webb (Inigo Jones’s man) to assist him.” <a href="../text/chapter-51.xhtml#noteref-1247" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1248" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>There had been recently established, under the Great Seal of England, a Corporation for the Royal Fishing, of which the Duke of York was Governor, Lord Craven Deputy-Governor, and the Lord Mayor and Chamberlain of London, for the time being, Treasurers, in which body was vested the sole power of licensing lotteries (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">The Newes</i>, October 6th, 1664). The original charter (dated April 8th, 1664), incorporating James, Duke of York, and thirty-six assistants as Governor and Company of the Royal Fishing of Great Britain and Ireland, is among the State Papers. The duke was to be Governor till February 26th, 1665. <a href="../text/chapter-51.xhtml#noteref-1248" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1249" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><dfn>Harslet</dfn> or haslet, the entrails of an animal, especially of a hog, as the heart, liver, <abbr>etc.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-51.xhtml#noteref-1249" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1250" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>See April 6th. <a href="../text/chapter-51.xhtml#noteref-1250" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1251" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sewer. <a href="../text/chapter-51.xhtml#noteref-1251" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1252" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Pepys’s leaning towards Roman Catholicism was a constant trouble to her husband; but, in spite of his fears, she died a Protestant (<abbr>Dr.</abbr> Milles’s certificate.) <a href="../text/chapter-51.xhtml#noteref-1252" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1253" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>March 16th, 1663⁠–⁠64. This day both Houses met, and on the gist the king opened the session with a speech from the throne, in which occurs this Passage: “I pray, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Speaker, and you, gentlemen of the House of Commons, give that Triennial Bill once a reading in your house, and then, in God’s name, do what you think fit for me and yourselves and the whole kingdom. I need not tell you how much I love parliaments. Never king was so much beholden to parliaments as I have been, nor do I think the crown can ever be happy without frequent parliaments.” (Cobbett’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Parliamentary History</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>, <abbr>cc.</abbr> 290, 291). <a href="../text/chapter-51.xhtml#noteref-1253" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1254" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The preacher appears to have had the grave scene in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Hamlet</i> in his mind, as he gives the same illustration of Alexander as Hamlet does. <a href="../text/chapter-51.xhtml#noteref-1254" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1255" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Elizabeth, daughter of John Savage, second Earl Rivers, and first wife to William, fourth Lord Petre, who was, in 1678, impeached by the Commons of high treason, and died under confinement in the Tower, January 5th, 1683, <i xml:lang="fr"><abbr>s. p.</abbr></i>⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-52.xhtml#noteref-1255" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1256" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Among the State Papers is a petition of Thomas Staine to the Navy Commissioners “for employment as plateworker in one or two dockyards. Has incurred ill-will by discovering abuses in the great rates given by the king for several things in the said trade. Begs the appointment, whereby it will be seen who does the work best and cheapest, otherwise he and all others will be discouraged from discovering abuses in future, with order thereon for a share of the work to be given to him” (“Calendar,” Domestic, 1663⁠–⁠64, <abbr>p.</abbr> 395) <a href="../text/chapter-52.xhtml#noteref-1256" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1257" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Buns or teacakes. <a href="../text/chapter-52.xhtml#noteref-1257" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1258" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>These notebooks referred to in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diary</i> are not known to exist now. <a href="../text/chapter-52.xhtml#noteref-1258" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1259" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Thomas Hill, a man whose taste for music caused him to be a very acceptable companion to Pepys. In January, 1664⁠–⁠65, he became assistant to the secretary of the Prize Office. <a href="../text/chapter-52.xhtml#noteref-1259" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1260" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Michael De Ruyter, the Dutch admiral, was born 1607. He served under Tromp in the war against England in 1653, and was Lieutenant Admiral General of Holland in 1665. He died April 26th, 1676, of wounds received in a battle with the French off Syracuse. Among the State Papers is a news letter (dated July 14th, 1664) containing information as to the views of the Dutch respecting a war with England. “They are preparing many ships, and raising 6,000 men, and have no doubt of conquering by sea.” “A wise man says the States know how to master England by sending moneys into Scotland for them to rebel, and also to the discontented in England, so as to place the King in the same straits as his father was, and bring him to agree with Holland” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Calendar</i>, 1663⁠–⁠64, <abbr>p.</abbr> 642). <a href="../text/chapter-52.xhtml#noteref-1260" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1261" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Tilt (<abbr>A.S.</abbr> teld) represents a tent or awning. It was used for a cloth covering for a cart or wagon, or for a canopy or awning over a portion of a boat. <a href="../text/chapter-53.xhtml#noteref-1261" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1262" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The stage was covered in by a tiled roof, but the pit was open to the sky. “The pit lay open to the weather for sake of light, but was subsequently covered in with a glazed cupola, which, however, only imperfectly protected the audience, so that in stormy weather the house was thrown into disorder, and the people in the pit were fain to rise” (Cunningham’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Story of Nell Gwyn</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> 1893, <abbr>p</abbr>. 33). <a href="../text/chapter-54.xhtml#noteref-1262" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1263" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>William Prynne had published in 1628 a small book against the drinking of healths, entitled, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">Healthes, Sicknesse; or a compendious and briefe Discourse, prouing, the Drinking and Pledging of Healthes to be sinfull and utterly unlawfull unto Christians … wherein all those ordinary objections, excuses or pretences, which are made to justifie, extenuate, or excuse the drinking or pledging of Healthes are likewise cleared and answered</i>. The pamphlet was dedicated to Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> as “more interessed in the theame and subject of this compendious discourse then any other that I know,” and “because your Majestie of all other persons within your owne dominions, are most dishonoured, prejudiced, and abused by these Healthes.” <a href="../text/chapter-54.xhtml#noteref-1263" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1264" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Lord Ashworth is probably a miswriting for Lord Ashley (afterwards Earl of Shaftesbury). <a href="../text/chapter-54.xhtml#noteref-1264" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1265" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A waterman. <a href="../text/chapter-54.xhtml#noteref-1265" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1266" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Lord Sandwich’s daughters. <a href="../text/chapter-54.xhtml#noteref-1266" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1267" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>From the commencement of the reign of Henry <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>, or perhaps earlier, it was the custom of the City of London to provide against scarcity, by requiring each of the chartered Companies to keep in store a certain quantity of corn, which was to be renewed from time to time, and when required for that purpose, produced in the market for sale, at such times and prices, and in such quantities, as the Lord Mayor or Common Council should direct. See the report of a case in the Court of Chancery, “Attorney-General <abbr>v.</abbr> Haberdashers’ Company” (Mylne and Keens <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reports</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 420).⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-54.xhtml#noteref-1267" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1268" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This seems to refer to knee timber, of which there was not a sufficient supply. A proposal was made to produce this bent wood artificially:</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“June 22, 1664. Sir William Petty intimated that it seemed by the scarcity and greater rate of knee timber that nature did not furnish crooked wood enough for building: wherefore he thought it would be fit to raise by art, so much of it in proportion, as to reduce it to an equal rate with strait timber”</p>
						<cite>Birch’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of the Royal Society</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-54.xhtml#noteref-1268" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1269" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Pliny tells us that cherries were introduced into Britain by the Romans, and Lydgate alludes to them as sold in the London streets. Richard Haines, fruiterer to Henry <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>, imported a number of cherry trees from Flanders, and planted them at Tenham, in Kent. Hence the fame of the Kentish cherries. <a href="../text/chapter-54.xhtml#noteref-1269" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1270" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<header>
							<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Burnett’s advice to mee.</p>
							<p>The Originall is fyled among my letters.</p>
						</header>
						<p>Take of y<sup>e</sup> Rootes of Marsh-Mallows foure ounces, of Cumfry, of Liquorish, of each two ounces, of y<sup>e</sup> Mowers of <abbr>St.</abbr> John’s Wort two Handsfull, of y<sup>e</sup> Leaves of Plantan, of Alehoofe, of each three handfulls, of Selfeheale, of Red Roses, of each one Handfull, of Cynament, of Nutmegg, of each halfe an ounce. Beate them well, then powre upon them one Quart of old Rhenish wine, and about Six houres after strayne it and clarify it with y<sup>e</sup> white of an Egge, and with a sufficient quantity of sugar, boyle it to y<sup>e</sup> consistence of a Syrrup and reserve it for use.</p>
						<p>Dissolve one spoonefull of this Syrrup in every draught of Ale or beere you drink.</p>
						<p>Morning and evening swallow y<sup>e</sup> quantity of an hazle-nutt of Cyprus Terebintine.</p>
						<p>If you are bound or have a fit of y<sup>e</sup> Stone eate an ounce of Cassia new drawne, from y<sup>e</sup> poynt of a knife.</p>
						<p>Old Canary or Malaga wine you may drinke to three or 4 glasses, but noe new wine, and what wine you drinke, lett it bee at meales.</p>
						<cite>From a slip of paper inserted in the Diary at this place</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-55.xhtml#noteref-1270" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1271" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“Their Majesties were treated at Tilbury Hope by the Earl of Sandwich, returning the same day, abundantly satisfied both with the dutiful respects of that honourable person and with the excellent condition of all matters committed to his charge”</p>
						<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">The Newes</i>, July 7th, 1664</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-55.xhtml#noteref-1271" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1272" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Hand. <a href="../text/chapter-55.xhtml#noteref-1272" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1273" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This was Speght’s edition of 1602, which is still in the Pepysian Library. The book is bound in calf, with brass clasps and bosses. It is not lettered. <a href="../text/chapter-55.xhtml#noteref-1273" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1274" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The mineral springs at Barnet Common, nearly a mile to the west of High Barnet. The discovery of the wells was announced in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Perfect Diurnall</i> of June 5th, 1652, and Fuller, writing in 1662, says that there are hopes that the waters may “save as many lives as were lost in the fatal battle at Barnet” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Worthies</i>, Herts). A pamphlet on <i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">The Barnet Well Water</i> was published by the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> <abbr class="name">W. M.</abbr> Trinder, <abbr>M.D.</abbr>, as late as the year 1800, but in 1840 the old well-house was pulled down. <a href="../text/chapter-55.xhtml#noteref-1274" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1275" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>For “owneth.” This sense is very common in Shakespeare. In the original edition of the authorized version of the Bible we read: “So shall the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man that oweth this girdle” (Acts <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxi</span> 1 <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>) Nares’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Glossary</i>. <a href="../text/chapter-55.xhtml#noteref-1275" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1276" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Provoke. <a href="../text/chapter-55.xhtml#noteref-1276" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1277" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Jonas Shish, master-shipwright at Deptford. There are several papers of his among the State Papers.</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“I was at the funeral of old <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Shish, Master Shipwright of His Majesty’s Yard here, an honest and remarkable man, and his death a public loss, for his excellent success in building ships (though altogether illiterate) and for bringing up so many of his children to be able artists. I held up the pall with three knights who did him that honour, and he was worthy of it. It was the custom of this good man to rise in the night and pray, kneeling in his own coffin, which he had lying by him for many years. He was born that famous year, the Gunpowder-plot, 1605”</p>
						<cite>Evelyn’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diary</i>, May 13th, 1680</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-55.xhtml#noteref-1277" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1278" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>General Soushe was Louis Ratuit, Comte de Souches. The battle was fought at Lewenz (or Leva), in Hungary.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-56.xhtml#noteref-1278" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1279" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>George Penn, the elder brother of Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Penn, was a wealthy merchant at San Lucar, the port of Seville. He was seized as a heretic by the Holy Office, and cast into a dungeon eight feet square and dark as the grave. There he remained three years, every month being scourged to make him confess his crimes. At last, after being twice put to the rack, he offered to confess whatever they would suggest. His property, £12,000, was then confiscated, his wife, a Catholic, taken from him, and he was banished from Spain forever.⁠—<abbr class="name">M.</abbr> <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-56.xhtml#noteref-1279" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1280" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This was the battle of <abbr>St.</abbr> Gothard, in which the Turks were defeated with great slaughter by the imperial forces under Montecuculli, assisted by the confederates from the Rhine, and by forty troops of French cavalry under Coligni. <abbr>St.</abbr> Gothard is in Hungary, on the river Raab, near the frontier of Styria; it is about one hundred and twenty miles south of Vienna, and thirty east of Gratz. The battle took place on the 9th Moharrem, <abbr class="era">A.H.</abbr> 1075, or 23rd July, <abbr class="era">A.D.</abbr> 1664 (old style), which is that used by Pepys.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-56.xhtml#noteref-1280" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1281" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The fact is, the Germans were beaten by the Turks, and the French won the battle for them.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-56.xhtml#noteref-1281" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1282" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>An optical instrument used to enable objects to be seen in the dark. The name is derived from the Greek. <a href="../text/chapter-56.xhtml#noteref-1282" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1283" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Servant = lover. <a href="../text/chapter-56.xhtml#noteref-1283" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1284" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Elizabeth Falkener, wife of John Falkener, announced to Pepys the death of “her dear and loving husband” in a letter dated July 19th, 1664 “begs interest that she may be in something considered by the person succeeding her husband in his employment, which has occasioned great expenses.” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Calendar of State Papers</i>, Domestic, 1663⁠–⁠64, <abbr>p.</abbr> 646) <a href="../text/chapter-56.xhtml#noteref-1284" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1285" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>William Penn, afterwards the famous Quaker. <abbr class="name">P.</abbr> Gibson, writing to him in March, 1711⁠–⁠12, says: “I remember your honour very well, when you newly came out of France and wore pantaloon breeches” <a href="../text/chapter-56.xhtml#noteref-1285" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1286" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Pepys would have been more proud of his cousin had he anticipated her husband’s becoming a knight, for she was probably the same person whose burial is recorded in the register of <abbr>St.</abbr> Helen’s, Bishopsgate, September 4th, 1704: “Dame Sarah Gyles, widow, relict of Sir John Gyles.”⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-57.xhtml#noteref-1286" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1287" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Afterwards Queen Mary <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. <a href="../text/chapter-57.xhtml#noteref-1287" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1288" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Among the State Papers is a “Statement of Articles in the Covenant proposed by the Commissioners for the Royal Fishing to, Sir <abbr class="name">Ant.</abbr> Desmarces &amp; <abbr>Co.</abbr> in reference to the regulation of lotteries; which are very unreasonable, and of the objections thereto” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Calendar of State Papers</i>, Domestic, 1663⁠–⁠64, <abbr>p.</abbr> 576.) <a href="../text/chapter-57.xhtml#noteref-1288" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1289" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Huysman. <a href="../text/chapter-57.xhtml#noteref-1289" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1290" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>In Lord Clarendon’s Essay, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.essay">On the decay of respect paid to Age</i>, he says that in his younger days he never kept his hat on before those older than himself, except at dinner.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-57.xhtml#noteref-1290" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1291" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>At the Commencement (<i xml:lang="la">Comitia Majora</i>) in July, the Prævaricator, or Varier, held a similar position to the Tripos at the <i xml:lang="la">Comitia Minora</i>. He was so named from <em>varying</em> the question which he proposed, either by a play upon the words or by the transposition of the terms in which it was expressed. Under the pretence of maintaining some philosophical question, he poured out a medley of absurd jokes and personal ridicule, which gradually led to the abolition of the office. In Thoresby’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diary</i> we read, “Tuesday, July 6th. The Prævaricator’s speech was smart and ingenious, attended with vollies of hurras” (see Wordsworth’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">University Life in the Eighteenth Century</i>).⁠—<abbr class="name">M.</abbr> <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-57.xhtml#noteref-1291" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1292" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Captain (afterwards Sir Robert) Holmes’ expedition to attack the Dutch settlements in Africa eventuated in an important exploit. Holmes suddenly left the coast of Africa, sailed across the Atlantic, and reduced the Dutch settlement of New Netherlands to English rule, under the title of New York. “The short and true state of the matter is this: the country mentioned was part of the province of Virginia, and, as there is no settling an extensive country at once, a few Swedes crept in there, who surrendered the plantations they could not defend to the Dutch, who, having bought the charts and papers of one Hudson, a seaman, who, by the commission from the crown of England, discovered a river, to which he gave his name, conceited they had purchased a province. Sometimes, when we had strength in those parts, they were English subjects; at others, when that strength declined, they were subjects of the United Provinces. However, upon King Charles’s claim the States disowned the title, but resumed it during our confusions. On March 12th, 1663⁠–⁠64, Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> granted it to the Duke of York … The King sent Holmes, when he returned, to the Tower, and did not discharge him; till he made it evidently appear that he had not infringed the law of nations.” (Campbell’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Naval History</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 89). How little did the King or Holmes himself foresee the effects of the capture.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-57.xhtml#noteref-1292" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1293" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Dry = hard, as “hard cash.” <a href="../text/chapter-57.xhtml#noteref-1293" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1294" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“There seems to be a curious fate reigning over the instruments which have the word ‘arch’ prefixed to their name. They have no vitality, and somehow or other come to grief. Even the famous archlute, which was still a living thing in the time of Handel, has now disappeared from the concert room and joined <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pepys’s ‘Arched Viall’ in the limbo of things forgotten. … <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pepys’s verdict that it would never do … has been fully confirmed by the event, as his predictions usually were, being indeed always founded on calm judgment and close observation.”</p>
						<cite>Hueffer’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Italian and other Studies</i>, 1883, <abbr>p.</abbr> 263</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-58.xhtml#noteref-1294" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1295" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Prince Rupert. <a href="../text/chapter-58.xhtml#noteref-1295" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1296" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“The duke had decided that the English fleet should consist of three squadrons to be commanded by himself, Prince Rupert, and Lord Sandwich, from which arrangement the two last, who were land admirals; had concluded that Penn would have no concern in this fleet. Neither the duke, Rupert, nor Sandwich had ever been engaged in an encounter of fleets. … Penn alone of the four was familiar with all these things. By the duke’s unexpected announcement that he should take Penn with him into his own ship, Rupert and Sandwich at once discovered that they would be really and practically under Penn’s command in everything.”</p>
						<cite>Granville Penn’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memorials of Sir William Penn</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 295</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-58.xhtml#noteref-1296" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1297" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Protector wished the Duke of Buckingham to marry his daughter Frances. She married, 1. Robert Rich, grandson and heir to Robert, Earl of Warwick, on November 11th, 1657, who died in the following February; 2. Sir John Russell, <abbr class="eoc">Bart.</abbr> She died January 27th, 1721⁠–⁠22, aged eighty-four.</p>
					<p>In <abbr class="name">T.</abbr> Morrice’s life of Roger, Earl of Orrery, prefixed to Orrery’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">State Letters</i> (Dublin, 1743, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 40), there is a circumstantial account of an interview between Orrery (then Lord Broghill) and Cromwell, in which the former suggested to the latter that Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> should marry Frances Cromwell. Cromwell gave great attention to the reasons urged, “but walking two or three turns, and pondering with himself, he told Lord Broghill the king would never forgive him the death of his father. His lordship desired him to employ somebody to sound the king in this matter, to see how he would take it, and offered himself to mediate in it for him. But Cromwell would not consent, but again repeated, ‘The king cannot and will not forgive the death of his father;’ and so he left his lordship, who durst not tell him he had already dealt with his majesty in that affair. Upon this my lord withdrew, and meeting Cromwell’s wife and daughter, they inquired how he had succeeded; of which having given them an account, he added they must try their interest in him, but none could prevail.” <a href="../text/chapter-58.xhtml#noteref-1297" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1298" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Reform, <abbr>i.e.</abbr> disband. See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoirs of Sir John Reresby</i>, September 2nd, 1651. “A great many younger brothers and reformed officers of the King’s army depended upon him for their meat and drink.” So <dfn>reformado</dfn>, a discharged or disbanded officer.⁠—<abbr class="name">M.</abbr> <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-58.xhtml#noteref-1298" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1299" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Knees of timber. <a href="../text/chapter-59.xhtml#noteref-1299" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1300" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">The Royal Charles</i> was the Duke of York’s ship, and Sir William Penn, who hoisted his flag in the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Royal James</i> on November 8th, shifted to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Royal Charles</i> on November 30th. The duke gave Penn the command of the fleet immediately under himself. On Penn’s monument he is styled “Great Captain Commander under His Royal Highness” (Penn’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memorials of Sir William Penn</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 296). <a href="../text/chapter-59.xhtml#noteref-1300" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1301" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Coventry, writing to Secretary Bennet (November 14th, 1664), refers to the objections made to Taylor, and adds:</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“Thinks the King will not easily consent to his rejection, as he is a man of great abilities and dispatch, and was formerly laid aside at Chatham on the Duchess of Albemarle’s earnest interposition for another. He is a fanatic, it is true, but all hands will be needed for the work cut out; there is less danger of them in harbour than at sea, and profit will convert most of them.”</p>
						<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Calendar of State Papers</i>, Domestic, 1664⁠–⁠65, <abbr>p.</abbr> 68</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-59.xhtml#noteref-1301" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1302" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Calendars of State Papers are full of references to applications for Commissionerships of the Prize Office. In December, 1664, the Navy Committee appointed themselves the Commissioners for Prize Goods, Sir Henry Bennet being appointed comptroller, and Lord Ashley treasurer. <a href="../text/chapter-59.xhtml#noteref-1302" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1303" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Captain Sir Thomas Teddiman (or Tyddiman) had been appointed Rear-Admiral of Lord Sandwich’s squadron of the English fleet. In a letter from Sir William Coventry to Secretary Bennet, dated November 13th, 1664, we read, “Rear Admiral Teddeman with four or five ships has gone to course in the Channel, and if he meet any refractory Dutchmen will teach them their duty” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Calendar of State Papers</i>, Domestic, 1664⁠–⁠65, <abbr>p.</abbr> 66). <a href="../text/chapter-59.xhtml#noteref-1303" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1304" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>According to Clarendon the officer here alluded to was a major in Cromwell’s own regiment of horse, and employed by him to treat with Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> whilst at Hampton Court; but being convinced of the insincerity of the proceeding, communicated his suspicions to that monarch, and immediately gave up his commission. We hear no more of Huntington till the Restoration, when his name occurs with those of many other officers, who tendered their services to the king. His reasons for laying down his commission are printed in Thurloe’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">State Papers</i> and Maseres’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Tracts</i>.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-60.xhtml#noteref-1304" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1305" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A brunette. <a href="../text/chapter-60.xhtml#noteref-1305" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1306" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Stroking or caressing. <a href="../text/chapter-60.xhtml#noteref-1306" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1307" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Pepys was wrong as to the name of Sir William Petty’s new doublekeeled boat. On February 13th, 1664⁠–⁠65, he gives the correct title, which was <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">The Experiment</i>. <a href="../text/chapter-60.xhtml#noteref-1307" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1308" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Micrographia: or some physiological descriptions of minute bodies made by Magnifying Glasses</i>, London, 1665, a very remarkable work with elaborate plates, some of which have been used for lecture illustrations almost to our own day. On November 23rd, 1664, the President of the Royal Society was “desired to sign a licence for printing of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hooke’s microscopical book.” At this time the book was mostly printed, but it was delayed, much to Hooke’s disgust, by the examination of several Fellows of the Society. In spite of this examination the council were anxious that the author should make it clear that he alone was responsible for any theory put forward, and they gave him notice to that effect. Hooke made this clear in his dedication (see Birch’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 490⁠–⁠491) <a href="../text/chapter-61.xhtml#noteref-1308" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1309" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>For taking New York from the Dutch. <a href="../text/chapter-61.xhtml#noteref-1309" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1310" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Raleigh. <a href="../text/chapter-61.xhtml#noteref-1310" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1311" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Belasyse, second son of Thomas, first Viscount Fauconberg, created Baron Belasyse of Worlaby, January 27th, 1644, Lord Lieutenant of the East Riding of Yorkshire, and Governor of Hull. He was appointed Governor of Tangier, and Captain of the Band of Gentlemen Pensioners. He was a Roman Catholic, and therefore was deprived of all his appointments in 1672 by the provisions of the Test Act, but in 1684 James <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> made him First Commissioner of the Treasury. He died 1689. <a href="../text/chapter-61.xhtml#noteref-1311" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1312" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Among the State Papers is a letter from Captain Thomas Allin to Sir Richard Fanshaw, dated from “<i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">The Plymouth</i>, Cadiz Bay,” December 25th, 1664, in which he writes: “On the 19th attacked with his seven ships left, a Dutch fleet of fourteen, three of which were men-of-war; sunk two vessels and took two others, one a rich prize from Smyrna; the others retired much battered. Has also taken a Dutch prize laden with iron and planks, coming from Lisbon (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Calendar</i>, Domestic, 1664⁠–⁠65, <abbr>p.</abbr> 122). <a href="../text/chapter-61.xhtml#noteref-1312" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1313" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The old form of the name Cadiz. <a href="../text/chapter-61.xhtml#noteref-1313" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1314" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This word is blotted, and the whole sentence is confused. <a href="../text/chapter-61.xhtml#noteref-1314" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1315" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This statement of a total prohibition of all trade, and for so long a period as eighteen months, by a government so essentially commercial as that of the United Provinces, seems extraordinary. The fact was, that when in the beginning of the year 1665 the States General saw that the war with England was become inevitable, they took several vigorous measures, and determined to equip a formidable fleet, and with a view to obtain a sufficient number of men to man it, prohibited all navigation, especially in the great and small fisheries as they were then called, and in the whale fishery. This measure appears to have resembled the embargoes so commonly resorted to in this country on similar occasions, rather than a total prohibition of trade.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-61.xhtml#noteref-1315" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1316" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Flags. <a href="../text/chapter-61.xhtml#noteref-1316" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1317" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>On his appointment as Reader in Law. <a href="../text/chapter-62.xhtml#noteref-1317" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1318" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The masquerade at Court took place on the 2nd, and is referred to by Evelyn, who was present, in his Diary. Some amusing incidents connected with the entertainment are related in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Grammont Memoirs</i> (chapter <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>). <a href="../text/chapter-62.xhtml#noteref-1318" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1319" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir Richard Willis, the betrayer of the Royalists, was one of the “Sealed Knot.” When the Restoration had become a certainty, he wrote to Clarendon imploring him to intercede for him with the king (see Lister’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of Clarendon</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 87). <a href="../text/chapter-62.xhtml#noteref-1319" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1320" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Thomas Barlow, Pepys’s predecessor as Clerk of the Acts, to whom he paid part of the salary. Barlow held the office jointly with Dennis Fleeting. <a href="../text/chapter-62.xhtml#noteref-1320" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1321" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Court and Character of King James, written and taken by Sir Anthony Weldon, being an eye and eare witnesse</i>, was published in 1650, and reprinted in 1651 under the title of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Truth brought to Light</i>. Weldon’s book was answered in a work entitled <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Aulicus Coquinariæ</i>. Both the original book and the answer were reprinted in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Secret History of the Court of King James</i>, Edinburgh, 1811, two <abbr>vols.</abbr> (edited by Sir Walter Scott). <a href="../text/chapter-62.xhtml#noteref-1321" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1322" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><dfn>Stoveing</dfn>, in sail-making, is the heating of the bolt-ropes, so as to make them pliable.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-62.xhtml#noteref-1322" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1323" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>According to the minutes of the Royal Society for February 15th, 1664⁠–⁠65, “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pepys was unanimously elected and admitted.” Notes of the experiments shown by Hooke and Boyle are given in Birch’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of the Royal Society</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 15. <a href="../text/chapter-62.xhtml#noteref-1323" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1324" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Battles or actions. <a href="../text/chapter-62.xhtml#noteref-1324" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1325" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Or <dfn>hammock-battens</dfn>: cleats or battens nailed to the sides of a vessel’s beams, from which to suspend the seamen’s hammocks. <a href="../text/chapter-62.xhtml#noteref-1325" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1326" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Similar reports of the cruelty of the English to the Dutch in Guinea were credited in Holland, and were related by Downing in a letter to Clarendon from the Hague, dated April 14th, 1665 (Lister’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of Clarendon</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 374). <a href="../text/chapter-62.xhtml#noteref-1326" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1327" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>“The experiment of trying to poison a dog with some of the Macassar powder in which a needle had been dipped was made, but without success.”⁠—Pepys himself made a communication at this meeting of the information he had received from the master of the Jersey ship, who had been in company of Major Holmes in the Guinea voyage, concerning the pendulum watches (Birch’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 23). <a href="../text/chapter-63.xhtml#noteref-1327" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1328" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Henry Brouncker, younger brother of William, Viscount Brouncker, President of the Royal Society. He was Groom of the Bedchamber to the Duke of York, and succeeded to the office of Cofferer on the death of William Ashburnham in 1671. His character was bad, and his conduct in the sea-fight of 1665 was impugned. He was expelled from the House of Commons, but succeeded to his brother’s title in 1684. He died in January, 1687. <a href="../text/chapter-63.xhtml#noteref-1328" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1329" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Daughter of William, Duke of Hamilton, wife of Lord Carnegy, who became Earl of Southesk on his father’s death. She is frequently mentioned in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Memoires de Grammont</i>, and in the letters of the second Earl of Chesterfield.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-63.xhtml#noteref-1329" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1330" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The practice of striking tallies at the Exchequer was a curious survival of an ancient method of keeping accounts. The method adopted is described in Hubert Hall’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Antiquities and Curiosities of the Exchequer</i>, 1891. The following account of the use of tallies, so frequently alluded to in the Diary, was supplied by Lord Braybrooke. Formerly accounts were kept, and large sums of money paid and received, by the King’s Exchequer, with little other form than the exchange or delivery of tallies, pieces of wood notched or scored, corresponding blocks being kept by the parties to the account; and from this usage one of the head officers of the Exchequer was called the tallier, or teller. These tallies were often negotiable; Adam Smith, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Wealth of Nations</i>, book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, <abbr>ch.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xi</span>, says that “in 1696 tallies had been at forty, and fifty, and sixty percent discount, and banknotes at twenty percent.” The system of tallies was discontinued in 1824; and the destruction of the old Houses of Parliament, in the night of October 16th, 1834, is thought to have been occasioned by the overheating of the flues, when the furnaces were employed to consume the tallies rendered useless by the alteration in the mode of keeping the Exchequer accounts. <a href="../text/chapter-63.xhtml#noteref-1330" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1331" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>“Two experiments were made for the finding out a way to breathe under water, useful for divers.” The first was on a bird and the second on “a kitling” (Birch’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 25). <a href="../text/chapter-63.xhtml#noteref-1331" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1332" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Jane, daughter to Sir Robert Needham, is frequently mentioned in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Grammont Memoirs</i>, and Evelyn calls her “that famous and indeed incomparable beauty” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diary</i>, August 2nd, 1683). Her portrait is in the Royal Collection amongst the beauties of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>’s Court. Sir Robert Needham was related to John Evelyn. <a href="../text/chapter-63.xhtml#noteref-1332" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1333" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Nell Gwynne. <a href="../text/chapter-64.xhtml#noteref-1333" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1334" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The French ambassadors were Henri de Bourbon, Duc de Verneuil, natural son of Henry <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> and brother of Henrietta Maria, and <abbr>M.</abbr> de Courtin.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-64.xhtml#noteref-1334" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1335" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>“Sir Robert Moray presented the Society from the King with a phial of Florentine poison sent for by his Majesty from Florence, on purpose to have those experiments related of the efficacy thereof, tried by the Society.” The poison had little effect upon the kitten (Birch’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 31). <a href="../text/chapter-64.xhtml#noteref-1335" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1336" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>An obsolete proverb, signifying to lose one’s hopes, a cake coming out of the oven in a state of dough being considered spoiled. “My cake is dough; but I’ll in among the rest; Out of hope of all, but my share in the feast.” Shakespeare, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Taming of the Shrew</i>, act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>, <abbr>sc.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>-<abbr class="name">M.</abbr> <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-64.xhtml#noteref-1336" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1337" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Among the State Papers are lists of watermen impressed and put on board the victualling ships. Attached to one of these is a “note of their unfitness and refractory conduct; also that many go ashore to sleep, and are discontent that they, as masters of families, are pressed, while single men are excused on giving money to the pressmen” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Calendar</i>, Domestic, 1664⁠–⁠65, <abbr>p.</abbr> 323). <a href="../text/chapter-64.xhtml#noteref-1337" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1338" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sayes Court, the well-known residence of John Evelyn. <a href="../text/chapter-65.xhtml#noteref-1338" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1339" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Daniel Coxe read an account of the effects of tobacco-oil distilled in a retort, by one drop of which given at the mouth he had killed a lusty cat, which being opened, smelled strongly of the oil, and the blood of the heart more strongly than the rest. … One drop of the Florentine <i xml:lang="it">oglio di tobacco</i> being again given to a dog, it proved stupefying and vomitive, as before”</p>
						<cite>Birch’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of the Royal Society</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 42, 43</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-65.xhtml#noteref-1339" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1340" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Alexander Browne, a printseller, who taught drawing, and practised it with success. He published in 1669, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><i xml:lang="la">Ars Pictoria</i>, or an Academy treating of Drawing, Painting, Limning and Etching</i>. <a href="../text/chapter-65.xhtml#noteref-1340" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1341" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Gunfleet Sand off the Essex coast. <a href="../text/chapter-65.xhtml#noteref-1341" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1342" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>i.e.</abbr> the watch. <a href="../text/chapter-65.xhtml#noteref-1342" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1343" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Thomas Pepys, of Hatcham Barnes, Surrey, Master of the Jewel House to Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> and James <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. <a href="../text/chapter-65.xhtml#noteref-1343" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1344" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i xml:lang="it">Formosa</i> = handsome (italian). <a href="../text/chapter-65.xhtml#noteref-1344" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1345" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Captain Edward Nixon, of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Elizabeth</i>, and Captain John Stanesby, of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Eagle</i>. John Lanyon wrote to the Navy Commissioners from Plymouth, May 16th:</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“Understands from the seamen that the conduct of Captains Nixon and Stanesby in their late engagement with two Dutch capers was very foul; the night they left the Dutch, no lights were put out as formerly, and though in sight of them in the morning, they still kept on their way; the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Eagle</i> lay by some time, and both the enemy’s ships plied on her, but finding the Elizabeth nearly out of sight she also made sail; it is true the wind and sea were high, but there were no sufficient reasons for such endeavours to get from them.”</p>
						<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Calendar of State Papers</i>, Domestic, 1664⁠–⁠65, <abbr>p.</abbr> 367</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Both captains were tried; Nixon was condemned to be shot but Stanesby was cleared, and Charnock asserts that he was commander of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Happy Return</i> in 1672. <a href="../text/chapter-65.xhtml#noteref-1345" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1346" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The new style was adopted by most of the countries of Europe long before it was legalized in England, although Russia still retains the old style. <a href="../text/chapter-65.xhtml#noteref-1346" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1347" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Goldfish introduced from China. <a href="../text/chapter-65.xhtml#noteref-1347" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1348" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>On May 29th Sir William Coventry wrote to Lord Arlington: “<abbr>Capt.</abbr> Langhorne has arrived with seven ships, and reports the taking of the Hamburg fleet with the man of war their convoy; mistaking the Dutch fleet for the English, he fell into it” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Calendar of State Papers</i>, Domestic, 1664⁠–⁠65, <abbr>p.</abbr> 393) <a href="../text/chapter-65.xhtml#noteref-1348" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1349" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir William Coventry and Sir William Penn to the Navy Commissioners, June 4th: “Engaged yesterday with the Dutch; they began to stand away at 3 <abbr class="time eoc">p.m.</abbr> Chased them all the rest of the day and night; 20 considerable ships are destroyed and taken; we have only lost the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Great Charity</i>. The Earl of Marlborough, Rear-Admiral Sansum, and Captain Kirby are slain, and Sir John Lawson wounded” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Calendar of State Papers</i>, Domestic, 1664⁠–⁠65, <abbr>p.</abbr> 406). <a href="../text/chapter-66.xhtml#noteref-1349" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1350" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Afterwards Sir Joseph Jordan, commander of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Royal Sovereign</i>, and Vice-Admiral of the Red, 1672. He was knighted on July 1st, 1665.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-66.xhtml#noteref-1350" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1351" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>In the royal charter granted by Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> in 1680 to William Penn for the government of his American province, to be styled Pennsylvania, special reference is made to “the memory and merits of Sir William Penn in divers services, and particularly his conduct, courage, and discretion under our dearest brother, James, Duke of York, in that signal battle and victory fought and obtained against the Dutch fleet commanded by Heer van Opdam in 1665” (Penn’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memorials of Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Penn</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 359). <a href="../text/chapter-66.xhtml#noteref-1351" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1352" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ady (Julia Cartwright), in her fascinating life of Henrietta, Duchess of Orleans, gives an account of the receipt of the news of the great sea-fight in Paris, and quotes a letter of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> to his sister, dated, “Whitehall, June 8th, 1665” The first report that reached Paris was that “the Duke of York’s ship had been blown up, and he himself had been drowned.” “The shock was too much for Madame … she was seized with convulsions, and became so dangerously ill that Lord Hollis wrote to the king, ‘If things had gone ill at sea I really believe Madame would have died.’ ” Charles wrote: “I thanke God we have now the certayne newes of a very considerable victory over the Duch; you will see most of the particulars by the relation my Lord Hopis will show you, though I have had as great a losse as ’tis possible in a good frinde, poore <abbr class="name">C.</abbr> Barckely. It troubles me so much, as I hope you will excuse the shortnesse of this letter, haveing receaved the newes of it but two houres agoe” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Madame</i>, 1894, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 215, 216). <a href="../text/chapter-66.xhtml#noteref-1352" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1353" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>’s letter of thanks to Lord Sandwich, dated “Whitehall, June 9th, 1665,” written entirely in the king’s hand, is printed in Ellis’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Original Letters</i>, 1st series, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 327. <a href="../text/chapter-66.xhtml#noteref-1353" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1354" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Of the four distinguished men who died after the late action with the Dutch and were buried in Westminster Abbey, the Earl of Marlborough was interred on June 14th, Viscount Muskerry on the 19th, the Earl of Falmouth on the 22nd, and Sir Edward Broughton on the 26th. After the entries in the Abbey Registers is this note: “These four last Hon<sup>ble</sup> Persons dyed in his Ma<sup>tyes</sup> service against the Dutch, excepting only that S<sup>r</sup> E<sup>d</sup> B<sup>r</sup> received his death’s wound at sea, but dyed here at home” (Chester’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Westminster Abbey Registers</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 162). <a href="../text/chapter-66.xhtml#noteref-1354" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1355" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">The Public Intelligencer</i>, published by Roger L’Estrange, the predecessor of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">London Gazette</i>. <a href="../text/chapter-66.xhtml#noteref-1355" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1356" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Captain Robert Holmes (afterwards knighted). Sir William Coventry, in a letter to Lord Arlington (dated from <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">The Royal Charles</i>, Southwold Bay, June 13th), writes: “<abbr>Capt.</abbr> Holmes asked to be rear admiral of the white squadron in place of Sansum who was killed, but the Duke gave the place to Captain Harman, on which he delivered up his commission, which the Duke received, and put Captain Langhorne in his stead” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Calendar of State Papers</i>, Domestic, 1664⁠–⁠65, <abbr>p.</abbr> 423). <a href="../text/chapter-66.xhtml#noteref-1356" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1357" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Harman, afterwards knighted. He had served with great reputation in several naval fights, and was desperately wounded in 1673, while engages with a Dutch man-o-war, which he captured. He survived the action some years, but never recovered his health.⁠—B. For an account of the life of Sir John Harman, see Charnock’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Biographia Navalis</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> 97⁠–⁠103. <a href="../text/chapter-66.xhtml#noteref-1357" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1358" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">The Prince</i> was Lord Sandwich’s ship; the captain was Roger Cuttance. It was put up at Chatham for repair at this date. <a href="../text/chapter-66.xhtml#noteref-1358" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1359" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir William Berkeley, see note, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 334. His behaviour after the death of his brother, Lord Falmouth, is severely commented on in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Poems on State Affairs</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 29</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>“Berkeley had heard it soon, and thought not good</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To venture more of royal Harding’s blood;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To be immortal he was not of age,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And did e’en now the Indian Prize presage;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And judged it safe and decent, cost what cost,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To lose the day, <em>since his dear brother’s lost</em>.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>With his whole squadron straight away he bore,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And, like good boy, promised to fight no more.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-66.xhtml#noteref-1359" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1360" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Colvill of Lombard Street, see ante, May 24th. He lost £85,832 17<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> 2<abbr class="currency">d.</abbr> by the closing of the Exchequer in 1672, and he died between 1672 and 1677 (Price’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Handbook of London Bankers</i>). <a href="../text/chapter-66.xhtml#noteref-1360" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1361" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><dfn>Club</dfn> = share.</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>“Next these a sort of Sots there are,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who crave more wine than they can bear,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Yet hate, when drunk, to pay or spend</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Their equal Club or Dividend,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But wrangle, when the Bill is brought,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And think they’re cheated when they’re not.”</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Delights of the Bottle, or the Compleat Vintner</i>, 3rd <abbr>ed.</abbr>, 1721, <abbr>p.</abbr> 29</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-66.xhtml#noteref-1361" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1362" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The game of bob-cherry. <a href="../text/chapter-66.xhtml#noteref-1362" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1363" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Prince Rupert. <a href="../text/chapter-66.xhtml#noteref-1363" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1364" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>According to the Bills of Mortality, the total number of deaths in London for the week ending June 27th was 684, of which number 267 were deaths from the plague. The number of deaths rose week by week until September 19th, when the total was 8,297, and the deaths from the plague 7,165. On September 26th the total had fallen to 6,460, and deaths from the plague to 5,533. The number fell gradually, week by week, till October 31st, when the total was 1,388, and deaths from the plague 1,031. On November 7th there was a rise to 1,787 and 1,414 respectively. On November 14th the numbers had gone down to 1,359 and 1,050 respectively. On December 12th the total had fallen to 442, and deaths from the plague to 243. On December 19th there was a rise to 525 and 281 respectively. The total of burials in 1665 was 97,506, of which number the plague claimed 68,596 victims. <a href="../text/chapter-66.xhtml#noteref-1364" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1365" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Queen-Mother never came to England again. She retired to her château at Colombes, near Paris, where she died in August, 1669, after a long illness; the immediate cause of her death being an opiate ordered by her physicians. She was buried, September 12th, in the church of <abbr>St.</abbr> Denis. Her funeral sermon was preached by Bossuet. Sir John Reresby speaks of Queen Henrietta Maria in high terms. He says that in the winter, 1659⁠–⁠60, although the Court of France was very splendid, there was a greater resort to the Palais Royal, “the good humour and wit of our Queen Mother, and the beauty of the Princess [Henrietta] her daughter, giving greater invitation than the more particular humour of the French Queen, being a Spaniard.” In another place he says: “Her majesty had a great affection for England, notwithstanding the severe usage she and hers had received from it. Her discourse was much with the great men and ladies of France in praise of the people and of the country; of their courage, generosity, good nature; and would excuse all their miscarriages in relation to unfortunate effects of the late war, as if it were a convulsion of some desperate and infatuated persons, rather than from the genius and temper of the kingdom” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoirs of Sir John Reresby</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Cartwright, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 43, 45). <a href="../text/chapter-66.xhtml#noteref-1365" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1366" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>There are several letters among the State Papers from Commissioner Thomas Middleton relating to the want of workmen at Portsmouth Dockyard. On June 29th Middleton wrote to Pepys, “The ropemakers have discharged themselves for want of money, and gone into the country to make hay.” The blockmakers, the joiners, and the sawyers all refused to work longer without money (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Calendar</i>, 1664⁠–⁠65, <abbr>p.</abbr> 453). <a href="../text/chapter-67.xhtml#noteref-1366" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1367" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The arrangements for the marriage of Lady Jemimah Montagu to Philip Carteret were soon settled, for the wedding took place on July 31st. <a href="../text/chapter-67.xhtml#noteref-1367" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1368" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The period alluded to is 1650, when the States-General disbanded part of the forces which the Prince of Orange (William) wished to retain. The prince attempted, but unsuccessfully, to possess himself of Amsterdam. In the same year he died, at the early age of twenty-four; some say of the smallpox; others, with Sir Richard Ford, say of poison.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-67.xhtml#noteref-1368" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1369" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The son of a shoemaker, bred to the sea-service; he rose to the rank of an admiral, and was killed in the fight with the Dutch, June, 1666.⁠—B. See post, June 10th, 1666. <a href="../text/chapter-67.xhtml#noteref-1369" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1370" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Among the State Papers is a letter from the king to the Lord General (dated August 8th, 1665):</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“Alderman Backwell being in great straits for the second payment he has to make for the service in Flanders, as much tin is to be transmitted to him as will raise the sum. Has authorized him and Sir George Carteret to treat with the tin farmers for 500 tons of tin to be speedily transported under good convoy; but if, on consulting with Alderman Backwell, this plan of the tin seems insufficient, then without further difficulty he is to dispose for that purpose of the £10,000 assigned for pay of the Guards, not doubting that before that comes due, other ways will be found for supplying it; the payment in Flanders is of such importance that some means must be found of providing for it”</p>
						<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Calendar</i>, Domestic, 1664⁠–⁠65, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 508, 509</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-67.xhtml#noteref-1370" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1371" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“A form of Common Prayer; together with an order for fasting for the averting of God’s heavy visitation upon many places of this realm. The fast to be observed within the cities of London and Westminster and places adjacent, on Wednesday the twelfth of this instant July, and both there and in all parts of this realm on the first Wednesday in every month during the visitation.”</p>
						<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Calendar of State Papers</i>, Domestic, 1664⁠–⁠65, <abbr>p.</abbr> 466</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-67.xhtml#noteref-1371" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1372" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><dfn><i xml:lang="fr">Arrêt</i></dfn>. The rupture between Alexander <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> and Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span> was healed in 1664, by the treaty signed at Pisa, on February 12th. On August 9th, the pope’s nephew, Cardinal Chigi, made his entry into Paris, as legate, to give the king satisfaction for the insult offered at Rome by the Corsican guard to the Duc de Crequi, the French ambassador; (see January 25th, 1662⁠–⁠63). Cardinal Imperiali, Governor of Rome, asked pardon of the king in person, and all the hard conditions of the treaty were fulfilled. But no <i xml:lang="fr">arrêt</i> against the pope was set forth in 1665. On the contrary, Alexander, now wishing to please the king, issued a constitution on February 2nd, 1665, ordering all the clergy of France, without any exception, to sign a formulary condemning the famous five propositions extracted from the works of Jansenius; and on April 29th, the king in person ordered the parliament to register the bull. The Jansenist party, of course, demurred to this proceeding; the Bishops of Alais, Angers, Beauvais, and Pamiers, issuing mandates calling upon their clergy to refuse. It was against these mandates, as being contrary to the king’s declaration and the pope’s intentions, that the <i xml:lang="fr">arrêt</i> was directed.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-67.xhtml#noteref-1372" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1373" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Kiss. <a href="../text/chapter-67.xhtml#noteref-1373" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1374" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The royal lodge of that name in Windsor Forest, occupied by Sir George Carteret as Vice-Chamberlain to the King.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-67.xhtml#noteref-1374" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1375" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> Brisband. <a href="../text/chapter-67.xhtml#noteref-1375" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1376" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><dfn><i xml:lang="fr">Haquenée</i></dfn> = an ambling nag fitted for ladies’ riding. <a href="../text/chapter-68.xhtml#noteref-1376" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1377" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Nonsuch Palace, near Epsom, where the Exchequer money was kept during the time of the plague. <a href="../text/chapter-68.xhtml#noteref-1377" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1378" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">The Sovereign of the Seas</i> was built at Woolwich in 1637 of timber which had been stripped of its bark while growing in the spring, and not felled till the second autumn afterwards; and it is observed by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Plot (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal"><abbr>Phil. Trans.</abbr></i> for 1691), in his discourse on the most seasonable time for felling timber, written by the advice of Pepys, that after forty-seven years, “all the ancient timber then remaining in her, it was no easy matter to drive a nail into it” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Quarterly Review</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 35).⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-68.xhtml#noteref-1378" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1379" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i xml:lang="fr">Fanfaron</i>, French, from <i xml:lang="fr">fanfare</i>, a sounding of trumpets; hence, a swaggerer, or empty boaster. <a href="../text/chapter-68.xhtml#noteref-1379" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1380" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A news letter of August 19th (Salisbury), gives the following account of this affair:⁠—“The Earl of Sandwich being on the Norway coast, ordered Sir Thomas Teddeman with 20 ships to attack 50 Dutch merchant ships in Bergen harbour; six convoyers had so placed themselves that only four or five of the ships could be reached at once. The Governor of Bergen fired on our ships, and placed 100 pieces of ordnance and two regiments of foot on the rocks to attack them, but they got clear without the loss of a ship, only 500 men killed or wounded, five or six captains among them. The fleet has gone to Sole Bay to repair losses and be ready to encounter the Dutch fleet, which is gone northward” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Calendar of State Papers</i>, 1664⁠–⁠65, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 526, 527). Medals were struck in Holland, the inscription in Dutch on one of these is thus translated: “Thus we arrest the pride of the English, who extend their piracy even against their friends, and who insulting the forts of Norway, violate the rights of the harbours of King Frederick; but, for the reward of their audacity, see their vessels destroyed by the balls of the Dutch” (Hawkins’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Medallic Illustrations of the History of Great Britain and Ireland</i>,” <abbr>ed.</abbr> Franks and Grueber, 1885, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 508). Sir Gilbert Talbot’s “True Narrative of the Earl of Sandwich’s Attempt upon Bergen with the English Fleet on the 3rd of August, 1665, and the Cause of his Miscarriage thereupon,” is in the British Museum (<abbr>Harl. MS.</abbr>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 6859). It is printed in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Archæologia</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 33. The Earl of Rochester also gave an account of the action in a letter to his mother (Wordsworth’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ecclesiastical Biography</i>, fourth edition, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 611). Sir John Denham, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Advice to a Painter</i>, gives a long satirical account of the affair. A coloured drawing of the attack upon Bergen, on vellum, showing the range of the ships engaged, is in the British Museum. Shortly after the Bergen affair forty of the Dutch merchant vessels, on their way to Holland, fell into the hands of the English, and in Penn’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memorials of Sir William Penn</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 364, is a list of the prizes taken on the 3rd and 4th September. The troubles connected with these prizes and the disgrace into which Lord Sandwich fell are fully set forth in subsequent pages of the Diary. Evelyn writes in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diary</i> (November 27th, 1665): “There was no small suspicion of my Lord Sandwich having permitted divers commanders who were at y<sup>e</sup> taking of y<sup>e</sup> East India prizes to break bulk and take to themselves jewels, silkes, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, tho’ I believe some whom I could name fill’d their pockets, my <abbr>Lo.</abbr> Sandwich himself had the least share. However, he underwent the blame, and it created him enemies, and prepossess’d y<sup>e</sup> <abbr>Lo.</abbr> Generall [Duke of Albemarle], for he spake to me of it with much zeale and concerne, and I believe laid load enough on <abbr>Lo.</abbr> Sandwich at Oxford.” <a href="../text/chapter-68.xhtml#noteref-1380" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1381" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Windham had entered into a formal engagement with the Earl of Rochester, “not without ceremonies of religion, that if either of them died, he should appear, and give the other notice of the future state, if there was any.” He was probably one of the brothers of Sir William Wyndham, <abbr class="eoc">Bart.</abbr> See Wordsworth’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ecclesiastical Biography</i>, fourth edition, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 615.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-68.xhtml#noteref-1381" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1382" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Eastland was a name given to the eastern countries of Europe. The Eastland Company, or Company of Merchants trading to the East Country, was incorporated in Queen Elizabeth’s reign (anno 21), and the charter was confirmed 13 <abbr>Car.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. They were also called “The Merchants of Elbing.” <a href="../text/chapter-68.xhtml#noteref-1382" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1383" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>’s Works, now in the Pepysian Library <a href="../text/chapter-68.xhtml#noteref-1383" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1384" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This republican plot was described by the Lord Chancellor in a speech delivered on October 9th, when parliament met at Oxford. <a href="../text/chapter-69.xhtml#noteref-1384" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1385" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Ombre is a Spanish game of cards, and the name is derived from the Spanish word <i xml:lang="es">hombre</i>, a man. It is said that the game was introduced into England by Queen Katharine of Braganza. Waller wrote an epigram “On a card that her Majesty tore at Ombre.” <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">H.</abbr> Hucks Gibbs published anonymously in 1873 an interesting little volume, with coloured plates, entitled <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Game of Ombre</i>. <a href="../text/chapter-69.xhtml#noteref-1385" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1386" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A gold coin, so called because it bore the image of an angel, varying in value from six shillings and eightpence to ten shillings. <a href="../text/chapter-69.xhtml#noteref-1386" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1387" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The old name for backgammon, used by Shakespeare and others. The following lines are from an epitaph entirely made up of puns on backgammon</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“Man’s life’s a game at tables, and he may</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Mend his bad fortune by his wiser play.”</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Wit’s <abbr>Recre.</abbr></i>, <abbr>i.</abbr> 250, reprint, 1817</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-69.xhtml#noteref-1387" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1388" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson was puzzled by the following passage in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Merry Wives of Windsor</i>, act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>, <abbr>sc.</abbr> 3: “Divide me like a bribe-buck, each a haunch. I will keep the sides to myself; <em>my shoulders for the fellow of this walk</em>.” If he could have read the account of Sir William Hickes’s dinner, he would at once have understood the allusion to the keeper’s perquisites of the shoulders of all deer killed in his walk.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-69.xhtml#noteref-1388" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1389" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Lord Sandwich was not so successful in convincing other people as to the propriety of his conduct at Bergen as he was with Pepys. <a href="../text/chapter-69.xhtml#noteref-1389" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1390" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>There is a shorthand journal of proceedings relating to Pepys’s purchase of some East India prize goods among the Rawlinson <abbr>MSS.</abbr> in the Bodleian Library. <a href="../text/chapter-69.xhtml#noteref-1390" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1391" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Cribbage. <a href="../text/chapter-69.xhtml#noteref-1391" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1392" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The same discovery was made in 1789, in digging the Brunswick Dock, also at Blackwall, and elsewhere in the neighbourhood. <a href="../text/chapter-69.xhtml#noteref-1392" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1393" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>These are the words in the <abbr>MS.</abbr>, and not “his son and the Lord Montagu,” as in some former editions. Pepys seems to have written Lord Montagu by mistake for Sir Edward Montagu. <a href="../text/chapter-69.xhtml#noteref-1393" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1394" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This picture by <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Pepys may have given trouble when Pepys was unjustifiably attacked for having Popish pictures in his house. <a href="../text/chapter-69.xhtml#noteref-1394" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1395" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">Instructions concerning erecting of a Library, presented to my Lord the President De Mesme by Gilbert Naudeus, and now interpreted by <abbr class="name">Jo.</abbr> Evelyn, Esquire. London, 1661</i>. This little book was dedicated to Lord Clarendon by the translator. It was printed while Evelyn was abroad, and is full of typographical errors; these are corrected in a copy mentioned in Evelyn’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Miscellaneous Writings</i>, 1825, <abbr>p.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>, where a letter to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Godolphin on the subject is printed. <a href="../text/chapter-70.xhtml#noteref-1395" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1396" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Bagwell. See ante, February 14th, 1664⁠–⁠65 <a href="../text/chapter-70.xhtml#noteref-1396" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1397" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Each of the Commissioners for the Sick and Wounded was appointed to a particular district, and Evelyn’s district was Kent and Sussex. On September 25th, 1665, Evelyn wrote in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diary</i>: “My Lord Admiral being come from y<sup>e</sup> fleete to Greenewich, I went thence with him to y<sup>e</sup> Cockpit to consult with the Duke of Albemarle. I was peremptory that unlesse we had £10,000 immediately, the prisoners would starve, and ’twas proposed it should be rais’d out of the <abbr>E.</abbr> India prizes now taken by Lord Sandwich. They being but two of y<sup>e</sup> Commission, and so not impower’d to determine, sent an expresse to his Majesty and Council to know what they should do.” <a href="../text/chapter-70.xhtml#noteref-1397" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1398" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Evelyn purchased Sayes Court, Deptford, in 1653, and laid out his gardens, walks, groves, enclosures, and plantations, which afterwards became famous for their beauty. When he took the place in hand it was nothing but an open field of one hundred acres, with scarcely a hedge in it. <a href="../text/chapter-70.xhtml#noteref-1398" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1399" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A false report. Alexander <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span> did not die till 1667. <a href="../text/chapter-70.xhtml#noteref-1399" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1400" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Philip <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, King of Spain, who succeeded to the throne in 1621, died in 1665. He was succeeded by his son Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. <a href="../text/chapter-70.xhtml#noteref-1400" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1401" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Captain Jeremiah Smith (or Smyth), knighted June, 1665; Admiral of the Blue in 1666. He succeeded Sir William Penn as Comptroller of the Victualling Accounts in 1669, and held the office until 1675. <a href="../text/chapter-70.xhtml#noteref-1401" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1402" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sion House, granted by Edward <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span> to his uncle, the Duke of Somerset. After his execution, 1552, it was forfeited, and given to John Dudley, Duke of Northumberland. The duke being beheaded in 1553, it reverted to the Crown, and was granted in 1604 to Henry Percy, Earl of Northumberland. It still belongs to the Duke of Northumberland. <a href="../text/chapter-70.xhtml#noteref-1402" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1403" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This person, erroneously called by Pepys Sir <abbr class="name">C.</abbr> Herbert, will be best defined by subjoining the inscription on his monument in Westminster Abbey: “Sir Charles Harbord, Knight, third son of Sir Charles Harbord, Knight, Surveyor-General, and First Lieutenant of the Royall James, under the most noble and illustrious Captaine, Edward, Earle of Sandwich, Vice-Admirall of England, which, after a terrible fight, maintained to admiration against a squadron of the Holland fleet, above six hours, neere the Suffolk coast, having put off two fireships; at last, being utterly disabled, and few of her men remaining unhurt, was, by a third, unfortunately set on fire. But he (though he swome well) neglected to save himselfe, as some did, and out of perfect love to that worthy Lord, whom, for many yeares, he had constantly accompanyed, in all his honourable employments, and in all the engagements of the former warre, dyed with him, at the age of <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>, much bewailed by his father, whom he never offended; and much beloved by all for his knowne piety, vertue, loyalty, fortitude, and fidelity.”⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-70.xhtml#noteref-1403" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1404" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Duke of York’s letter appointing Thomas Wilson Surveyor of the Victualling of His Majesty’s Navy in the Port of London, and referring to Pepys as Surveyor-General of the Victualling Affairs, is printed in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoirs of the English Affairs, chiefly Naval, 1660⁠–⁠73</i>, by James, Duke of York, 1729, <abbr>p.</abbr> 131. <a href="../text/chapter-70.xhtml#noteref-1404" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1405" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This sum was granted by the Commons to Charles, with a request that he would bestow it on his brother.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-70.xhtml#noteref-1405" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1406" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This must surely have been Evelyn’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sculptura, or the History and Art of Chalcography and Engraving in Copper</i>, published in 1662. The translation of Freart’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Idea of the Perfection of Painting demonstrated</i> was not published until 1668. <a href="../text/chapter-71.xhtml#noteref-1406" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1407" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The tide of popular indignation ran high against Lord Sandwich, and he was sent to Spain as ambassador to get him honourably out of the way (see post, December 6th). <a href="../text/chapter-71.xhtml#noteref-1407" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1408" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The phrase “set up my rest” is a metaphor from the once fashionable game of Primero, meaning, to stand upon the cards you have in your hand, in hopes they may prove better than those of your adversary. Hence, to make up your mind, to be determined (see Nares’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Glossary</i>). <a href="../text/chapter-71.xhtml#noteref-1408" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1409" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Bagwell’s wife. <a href="../text/chapter-71.xhtml#noteref-1409" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1410" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Erith. <a href="../text/chapter-71.xhtml#noteref-1410" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1411" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Pillau. <a href="../text/chapter-71.xhtml#noteref-1411" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1412" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Frosting means, having the horses’ shoes turned up by the smith. <a href="../text/chapter-71.xhtml#noteref-1412" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1413" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Shaving. <a href="../text/chapter-71.xhtml#noteref-1413" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1414" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Fretful, tetchy. <a href="../text/chapter-71.xhtml#noteref-1414" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1415" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>When Lord Sandwich was away a new commander had to be chosen, and rank and long service pointed out Prince Rupert for the office, it having been decided that the heir presumptive should be kept at home. It was thought, however, that the same confidence could not be placed in the prince’s discretion as in his courage, and therefore the Duke of Albemarle was induced to take a joint command with him, “and so make one admiral of two persons” (see Lister’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of Clarendon</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 360, 361). <a href="../text/chapter-72.xhtml#noteref-1415" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1416" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The passage between brackets is from a piece of paper inserted in this place. <a href="../text/chapter-72.xhtml#noteref-1416" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1417" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Hinton, <abbr>M.D.</abbr>, a strong royalist, who attended Henrietta Maria in her confinement at Exeter when she gave birth to the Princess Henrietta. He was knighted by Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, and appointed physician in ordinary to the king and queen. His knighthood was a reward for having procured a private advance of money from his kinsman, the goldsmith, to enable the Duke of Albemarle to pay the army (see “Memorial to King Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> from Sir John Hinton, <abbr class="era">A.D.</abbr> 1679,” printed in Ellis’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Original Letters</i>, 3rd series, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 296). <a href="../text/chapter-72.xhtml#noteref-1417" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1418" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>According to Granville Penn (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memorials of Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Penn</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> 488 <abbr>n.</abbr>) £2,000 went to Lord Sandwich and £8,000 among eight others. <a href="../text/chapter-72.xhtml#noteref-1418" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1419" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This document is in the British Museum (Harleian <abbr>MS.</abbr> 6287), and is entitled, “A Letter from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pepys, dated at Greenwich, 1 <abbr>Jan.</abbr> 1665⁠–⁠6, which he calls his New Year’s Gift to his <abbr>hon.</abbr> friend, Sir <abbr class="name">Wm.</abbr> Coventry, wherein he lays down a method for securing his Majesty in husbandly execution of the Victualling Part of the Naval Expense.” It consists of nineteen closely written folio pages, and is a remarkable specimen of Pepys’s business habits.⁠—B. There are copies of several letters on the victualling of the navy, written by Pepys in 1666, among the Rawlinson <abbr>MSS.</abbr> in the Bodleian. <a href="../text/chapter-73.xhtml#noteref-1419" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1420" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Scottish ballad is entitled, “Sir John Grehme and Barbara Allan,” and the English version, “Barbara Allen’s Cruelty.” Both are printed in Percy’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reliques</i>, Series <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. <a href="../text/chapter-73.xhtml#noteref-1420" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1421" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“This Duchess was Chancellor Hyde’s daughter, and she was a very handsome woman, and had a great deal of wit; therefore it was not without reason that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Sydney, the handsomest youth of his time, of the Duke’s bedchamber, was so much in love with her, as appeared to us all, and the Duchess not unkind to him, but very innocently. He was afterwards banished the Court for another reason, as was reported”</p>
						<cite>Sir John Reresby’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoirs</i>, August 5th, 1664, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Cartwright, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 64,65</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“ ‘How could the Duke of York make my mother a Papist?’ said the Princess Mary to <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Bumet. ‘The Duke caught a man in bed with her,’ said the Doctor, ‘and then had power to make her do anything.’ The Prince, who sat by the fire, said, ‘Pray, madam, ask the Doctor a few more questions’ ”</p>
						<cite>Spence’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Anecdotes</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Singer, 329</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-73.xhtml#noteref-1421" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1422" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Make bows, play the courtier. The reading, “make leagues,” appeared in former editions till <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Mynors Bright corrected it. <a href="../text/chapter-73.xhtml#noteref-1422" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1423" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Lover. <a href="../text/chapter-73.xhtml#noteref-1423" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1424" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The dredger was probably the <i xml:lang="fr">drageoir</i> of France; in low Latin, <i xml:lang="la">dragerium</i>, or <i xml:lang="la">drageria</i>, in which comfits (<i xml:lang="fr">dragées</i>) were kept. Roquefort says, “The ladies wore a little spice-box, in shape like a watch, to carry <i xml:lang="fr">dragées</i>, and it was called a <i xml:lang="fr">drageoir</i>.” The custom continued certainly till the middle of the last century. Old Palsgrave, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Eclaircissement de la Langue Françayse</i>, gives “dradge” as spice, rendering it by the French word <i xml:lang="fr">dragée</i>. Chaucer says, of his Doctor of Physic,</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“Full ready hadde he his Apothecaries</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To send him dragges, and his lattuaries.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>The word sometimes may have signified the pounded condiments in which our forefathers delighted. It is worth notice, that “dragge” was applied to a grain in the eastern counties, though not exclusively there, appearing to denote mixed grain. Bishop Kennett tells us that “dredge mault is mault made up of oats, mixed with barley, of which they make an excellent, freshe, quiete sort of drinke, in Staffordshire.” The dredger is still commonly used in our kitchen.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-74.xhtml#noteref-1424" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1425" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Philip <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>, who died September 17th, 1665. <a href="../text/chapter-74.xhtml#noteref-1425" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1426" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>It was the fashion at this time to be painted as <abbr>St.</abbr> Catherine, in compliment to the queen. <a href="../text/chapter-74.xhtml#noteref-1426" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1427" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Cadiz. <a href="../text/chapter-74.xhtml#noteref-1427" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1428" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Afterwards the famous Sir Christopher Wren. He was one of the mainstays of the Royal Society. <a href="../text/chapter-74.xhtml#noteref-1428" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1429" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The camera obscura. <a href="../text/chapter-74.xhtml#noteref-1429" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1430" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>William Castell wrote to the Navy Commissioners on February 17th, 1665⁠–⁠66, to inform them that the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Defiance</i> had gone to Longreach, and again, on February 22nd, to say that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Grey had no masts large enough for the new ship. Sir William Batten on March 29th asked for the consent of the Board to bring the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Defiance</i> into dock (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Calendar of State Papers</i>, Domestic, 1665⁠–⁠66, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 252, 262, 324). <a href="../text/chapter-75.xhtml#noteref-1430" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1431" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Cadiz. <a href="../text/chapter-75.xhtml#noteref-1431" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1432" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Elbe. <a href="../text/chapter-75.xhtml#noteref-1432" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1433" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>There are several erasures in the original <abbr class="eoc">MS.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-75.xhtml#noteref-1433" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1434" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Donna Luiza, the Queen Regent of Portugal. She was daughter of the Duke de Medina Sidonia and widow of Juan <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>. The Court wore the deepest mourning on this occasion. The ladies were directed to wear their hair plain, and to appear without spots on their faces, the disfiguring fashion of patching having just been introduced.⁠—Strickland’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Queens of England</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">viii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 362. <a href="../text/chapter-75.xhtml#noteref-1434" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1435" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Richard Cromwell subsequently returned to England, and resided in strict privacy at Cheshunt for some years before his death in 1712. <a href="../text/chapter-76.xhtml#noteref-1435" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1436" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The <i xml:lang="la">columna rostrata</i> erected in the Forum to <abbr class="name">C.</abbr> Duilius, who obtained a triumph for the first naval victory over the Carthaginians, <abbr class="era">B.C.</abbr> 261. Part of the column was discovered in the ruins of the Forum near the Arch of Septimius, and transferred to the Capitol.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-76.xhtml#noteref-1436" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1437" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A cant expression for tight shoes. <a href="../text/chapter-76.xhtml#noteref-1437" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1438" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This book, which has frequently been reprinted, was written by Roger de Rabutin, Comte de Bussy, for the amusement of his mistress, Madame de Montglas, and consists of sketches of the chief ladies of the court, in which he libelled friends and foes alike. These circulated in manuscript, and were printed at Liège in 1665. Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span> was so much annoyed with the book that he sent the author to the Bastille for over a year. <a href="../text/chapter-77.xhtml#noteref-1438" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1439" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir Walter Scott observes, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of Dryden</i>, that the romances of Calprenede and Scuderi, those ponderous and unmerciful folios, now consigned to oblivion, were, in their day, not only universally read and admired, but supposed to furnish the most perfect models of gallantry and heroism. <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Johnson read them all. “I have,” says <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Chapone, “and yet I am still alive, dragged through <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Le Grand Cyrus</i>, in twelve huge volumes; <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Cleopatra</i>, in eight or ten; <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ibrahim</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Clelie</i>, and some others, whose names, as well as all the rest of them, I have forgotten” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Letters to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Carter</i>). No wonder that Pepys sat on thorns, when his wife began to recite <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Le Grand Cyrus</i> in the coach, “and trembled at the impending tale.”⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-77.xhtml#noteref-1439" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1440" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Kensington. <a href="../text/chapter-78.xhtml#noteref-1440" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1441" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Evelyn was in his garden when he heard the guns, and be at once set off to Rochester and the coast, but he found that nothing had been heard at Deal (see his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diary</i>, June 1st, 1666). <a href="../text/chapter-78.xhtml#noteref-1441" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1442" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><dfn>Mother</dfn> or mauther, a wench. <a href="../text/chapter-78.xhtml#noteref-1442" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1443" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This treatment seems to have been that of the Dutch populace alone, and there does not appear to have been cause of complaint against the government. Respecting Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Berkeley’s body the following notice was published in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">London Gazette</i> of July 15th, 1666 (<abbr>No.</abbr> 69) “Whitehall, July 15. This day arrived a trumpet from the States of Holland, who came over from Calais in the Dover packet-boat, with a letter to his Majesty, that the States have taken order for the embalming the body of Sir William Berkeley, which they have placed in the chapel of the great church at the Hague, a civility they profess to owe to his corpse, in respect to the quality of his person, the greatness of his command, and of the high courage and valour he showed in the late engagement; desiring his Majesty to signify his pleasure about the further disposal of it.” “Frederick Ruysch, the celebrated Dutch anatomist, undertook, by order of the States-General, to inject the body of the English Admiral Berkeley, killed in the sea-fight of 1666; and the body, already somewhat decomposed, was sent over to England as well prepared as if it had been the fresh corpse of a child. This produced to Ruysch, on the part of the States-General, a recompense worthy of their liberality, and the merit of the anatomist,” (James’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Medical Dictionary</i>, quoted in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Gentleman’s Magazine</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lvii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 214). Sir William Berkeley was buried the following August in Westminster Abbey. <a href="../text/chapter-78.xhtml#noteref-1443" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1444" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Jean Baptiste Lulli, son of a Tuscan peasant, born 1633, died 1687. He invented the dramatic overture.</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“But during the first years of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> all musick affected by the <i xml:lang="fr">beau mond</i> run in the french way; and the rather because at that time the master of the court musick in France, whose name was Baptista (an Italian frenchifyed) had influenced the french style by infusing a great portion of the Italian harmony into it, whereby the ayre was exceedingly improved.”</p>
						<cite>North’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoires of Musick</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Rimbault, 1846, <abbr>p.</abbr> 102</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-78.xhtml#noteref-1444" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1445" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Duke of Albemarle. <a href="../text/chapter-78.xhtml#noteref-1445" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1446" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Abate from an amount. <a href="../text/chapter-78.xhtml#noteref-1446" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1447" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This division of the fleet was the original cause of the disaster, and at a later period the enemies of Clarendon charged him with having advised this action, but Coventry’s communication to Pepys in the text completely exonerates Clarendon. <a href="../text/chapter-78.xhtml#noteref-1447" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1448" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>As his conduct during the Great Fire fully proved, when he is said to have boasted that he would extinguish the flames by the same means to which Swift tells us Gulliver had recourse at Lilliput.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-78.xhtml#noteref-1448" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1449" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Knipp. <a href="../text/chapter-79.xhtml#noteref-1449" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1450" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Enrico Caterino Davila (1576⁠–⁠1631) was one of the chief historical writers of Italy, and his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="it">Storia delle guerre civili di Francia</i> covers a period of forty years, from the death of Henri <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> to the Peace of Vervins in 1598. <a href="../text/chapter-79.xhtml#noteref-1450" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1451" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir William Penn’s instructions from the Duke of York directing him to embark on his Majesty’s yacht <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Henrietta</i>, and to see to the manning of such ships has had been left behind by the fleet, dated on this day, 20th July, is printed in Penn’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memorials of Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Penn</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 406. <a href="../text/chapter-79.xhtml#noteref-1451" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1452" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This picture occasioned Pepys trouble long afterwards, having been brought as evidence that he was a Papist (see <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiii</span>). <a href="../text/chapter-79.xhtml#noteref-1452" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1453" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Coventry. <a href="../text/chapter-79.xhtml#noteref-1453" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1454" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>In a letter from Richard Browne to Williamson, dated Yarmouth, July 30th, we read, “The Zealanders were engaged with the Blue squadron Wednesday and most of Thursday, but at length the Zealanders ran; the Dutch fleet escaped to the Weelings and Goree” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Calendar of State Papers</i>, 1665⁠–⁠66, <abbr>p.</abbr> 591). <a href="../text/chapter-79.xhtml#noteref-1454" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1455" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>To spoom, or spoon, is to go right before the wind, without any sail.</p>
						<cite>
							<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sea Dictionary</i>
						</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Dryden uses the word</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“When virtue spooms before a prosperous gale,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>My heaving wishes help to fill the sail.”</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Hind and Panther</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> 96</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-80.xhtml#noteref-1455" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1456" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Lord Hinchingbrooke. <a href="../text/chapter-80.xhtml#noteref-1456" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1457" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Melon. <a href="../text/chapter-80.xhtml#noteref-1457" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1458" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A proclamation ordering August 14th to be observed in London and Westminster, and August 23rd in other places, as a day of thanksgiving for the late victory at sea over the Dutch, was published on August 6th. <a href="../text/chapter-80.xhtml#noteref-1458" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1459" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Bear Garden was situated on Bankside, close to the precinct of the Clinke Liberty, and very near to the old palace of the bishops of Winchester. Stow, to his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Survey</i>, says: “There be two Bear Gardens, the old and new Places.” The name still exists in a street or lane at the foot of Southwark Bridge, and in Bear Garden Wharf. <a href="../text/chapter-80.xhtml#noteref-1459" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1460" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>On the 8th August the Duke of Albemarle reported to Lord Arlington that he had “sent 1000 good men under Sir <abbr class="name">R.</abbr> Holmes and Sir William Jennings to destroy the islands of Vlie and Schelling.” On the 10th James Hayes wrote to Williamson: “On the 9th at noon smoke was seen rising from several places in the island of Vlie, and the 10th brought news that Sir Robert had burned in the enemy’s harbour 160 outward bound valuable merchant men and three men-of-war, and taken a little pleasure boat and eight guns in four hours. The loss is computed at a million sterling, and will make great confusion when the people see themselves in the power of the English at their very doors. Sir Robert then landed his forces, and is burning the houses in Vlie and Schelling as bonfires for his good success at sea” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Calendar of State Papers</i>, 1666⁠–⁠67, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 21, 27). <a href="../text/chapter-80.xhtml#noteref-1460" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1461" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This bank at Amsterdam is referred to in a tract entitled <i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">An Appeal to Caesar</i>, 1660, <abbr>p.</abbr> 22. In 1640 Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> seized the money in the mint in the Tower entrusted to the safe keeping of the Crown. It was the practice of the London goldsmiths at this time to allow interest at the rate of six or eight percent on money deposited with them (<abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Biddulph Martin, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Grasshopper in Lombard Street</i>, 1892, <abbr>p.</abbr> 152). <a href="../text/chapter-80.xhtml#noteref-1461" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1462" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The town burned (see August 15th, ante) was Brandaris, a place of 1000 houses, on the isle of Schelling; the ships lay between that island and the Fly (<abbr>i.e.</abbr> Vlieland), the adjoining island. This attack probably provoked that by the Dutch on Chatham. <a href="../text/chapter-80.xhtml#noteref-1462" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1463" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>These presses still exist, and, according to Pepys’s wish, they are placed in the second court of Magdalene College in a room which they exactly fit, and the books are arranged in the presses just as they were when presented to the college.⁠—<abbr class="name">M.</abbr> <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-80.xhtml#noteref-1463" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1464" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The letter from Prince Rupert and the Duke of Albemarle to the king (dated August 27th, from the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Royal Charles</i>, Sole Bay) is among the State Papers. The generals complain of the want of supplies, in spite of repeated importunities. The demands are answered by accounts from <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pepys of what has been sent to the fleet, which will not satisfy the ships, unless the provisions could be found “… Have not a month’s provision of beer, yet Sir <abbr>Wm.</abbr> Coventry assures the ministers that they are supplied till <abbr>Oct.</abbr> 3; unless this is quickened they will have to return home too soon. … Want provisions according to their own computation, not Sir <abbr>Wm.</abbr> Coventry’s, to last to the end of October” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Calendar</i>, 1666⁠–⁠67, <abbr>p.</abbr> 71). <a href="../text/chapter-80.xhtml#noteref-1464" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1465" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">King Henry <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span></i>, Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>, <abbr>sc.</abbr> 4. <a href="../text/chapter-80.xhtml#noteref-1465" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1466" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir Thomas Bludworth. See June 30th, 1666. <a href="../text/chapter-81.xhtml#noteref-1466" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1467" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir William Coventry wrote to Lord Arlington on the evening of this day, “The Duke of York fears the want of workmen and tools tomorrow morning, and wishes the deputy lieutenants and justices of peace to summon the workmen with tools to be there by break of day. In some churches and chapels are great hooks for pulling down houses, which should be brought ready upon the place tonight against the morning” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Calendar of State Papers</i>, 1666⁠–⁠67, <abbr>p.</abbr> 95). <a href="../text/chapter-81.xhtml#noteref-1467" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1468" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The virginal differed from the spinet in being square instead of triangular in form. The word pair was used in the obsolete sense of a set, as we read also of a pair of organs. The instrument is supposed to have obtained its name from young women, playing upon it. <a href="../text/chapter-81.xhtml#noteref-1468" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1469" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A copy of this letter, preserved among the Pepys <abbr>MSS.</abbr> in the author’s own handwriting, is subjoined:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:letter">
						<p>“<span epub:type="z3998:salutation">Sir</span>, The fire is now very neere us as well on Tower Streete as Fanchurch Street side, and we little hope of our escape but by this remedy, to y<sup>e</sup> want whereof we doe certainly owe y<sup>e</sup> loss of y<sup>e</sup> City namely, y<sup>e</sup> pulling down of houses, in y<sup>e</sup> way of y<sup>e</sup> fire. This way Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Pen and myself have so far concluded upon y<sup>e</sup> practising, that he is gone to Woolwich and Deptford to supply himself with men and necessarys in order to the doeing thereof, in case at his returne our condition be not bettered and that he meets with his <abbr>R. H<sup>s</sup></abbr> approbation, which I had thus undertaken to learn of you. Pray please to let me have this night (at whatever hour it is) what his <abbr>R. H<sup>s</sup></abbr> directions are in this particular; Sir <abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Minnes and Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Batten having left us, we cannot add, though we are well assured of their, as well as all y<sup>e</sup> neighbourhood’s concurrence.</p>
						<footer>
							<p epub:type="z3998:valediction">“Y<sup>r</sup> obedient serv<sup>nt</sup>,</p>
							<p class="signature" epub:type="z3998:sender">“<abbr class="name">S. P.</abbr></p>
							<p epub:type="z3998:recipient">“Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Coventry,</p>
							<p epub:type="se:letter.dateline">“<abbr>Sept<sup>r</sup>.</abbr> 4, 1666.”</p>
						</footer>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-81.xhtml#noteref-1469" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1470" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr class="name">J.</abbr> Hickes wrote to Williamson on September 3rd from the “Golden Lyon, Red Cross Street Posthouse. Sir Philip [Frowde] and his lady fled from the [letter] office at midnight for safety; stayed himself till 1 <abbr class="time">a.m.</abbr> till his wife and childrens’ patience could stay, no longer, fearing lest they should be quite stopped up; the passage was so tedious they had much ado to get where they are. The Chester and Irish, mails have come-in; sends him his letters, knows not how to dispose of the business” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Calendar of State Papers</i>, 1666⁠–⁠67, <abbr>p.</abbr> 95). <a href="../text/chapter-81.xhtml#noteref-1470" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1471" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The terrible disaster which overtook London was borne by the inhabitants of the city with great fortitude, but foreigners and Roman Catholics had a bad dime. As no cause for the outbreak of the fire could be traced, a general cry was raised that it owed its origin to a plot. In a letter from Thomas Waade to Williamson (dated “Whitby, <abbr>Sept.</abbr> 14th”) we read, “The destruction of London by fire is reported to be a hellish contrivance of the French, Hollanders, and fanatic party” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Calendar of State Papers</i>, 1666⁠–⁠67, <abbr>p.</abbr> 124). <a href="../text/chapter-81.xhtml#noteref-1471" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1472" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>On September 5th proclamation was made “ordering that for supply of the distressed people left destitute by the late dreadful and dismal fire … great proportions of bread be brought daily, not only to the former markets, but to those lately ordained; that all churches, chapels, schools, and public buildings are to be open to receive the goods of those who know not how to dispose of them.” On September 6th, proclamation ordered “that as the markets are burned down, markets be held in Bishopsgate Street, Tower Hill, Smithfield, and Leadenhall Street” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Calendar of State Papers</i>, 1666⁠–⁠67, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 100, 104). <a href="../text/chapter-81.xhtml#noteref-1472" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1473" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“They swallow their own contradictions as easily as a hector can drink a frog in a glass of wine.”</p>
						<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Benlivoglio and Urania</i>, book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 92, 3rd edit</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-81.xhtml#noteref-1473" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1474" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This word was apparently of Evelyn’s own making. <a href="../text/chapter-81.xhtml#noteref-1474" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1475" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>William Garway, elected <abbr>M.P.</abbr> for Chichester, March 26th, 1661, and in 1674 he was appointed by the House to confer with Lord Shaftesbury respecting the charge against Pepys being popishly affected. See note to the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxii</span>, and for his character, October 6th, 1666. <a href="../text/chapter-82.xhtml#noteref-1475" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1476" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>As Sir John Minnes performed the duties inefficiently, it was considered necessary to take the office from him. See January 21st. <a href="../text/chapter-82.xhtml#noteref-1476" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1477" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>There are several references to this new fashion of dress introduced by the king, Pepys saw the Duke of York put on the vest on the 13th, and he says Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> himself put it on on the 15th. On November 4th Pepys dressed himself in the new vest and coat. See notes, October 15th and November 22nd. <a href="../text/chapter-82.xhtml#noteref-1477" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1478" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Captain Du Buat, a Frenchman in the Dutch service, plotted with two magistrates of Rotterdam to obtain a peace with England as the readiest means of pressing the elevation of the Prince of Orange to the office of Captain-General. He was brought before the Supreme Court of Holland, condemned, and executed. He had been one of the household of the Prince of Orange who were dismissed by De Witt. <a href="../text/chapter-82.xhtml#noteref-1478" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1479" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxi</span>, where the register of <abbr>St.</abbr> Margaret’s parish, Westminster, is quoted to the effect that Pepys was married December 1st, 1655. It seems incomprehensible that both husband and wife should have been wrong as to the date of their wedding day, but <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Pepys was unquestionably wrong as to the number of years, for they had been married nearly eleven. <a href="../text/chapter-82.xhtml#noteref-1479" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1480" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The parliament voted this day a supply of £1,800,000 sterling. See below. <a href="../text/chapter-82.xhtml#noteref-1480" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1481" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Prince Rupert. <a href="../text/chapter-82.xhtml#noteref-1481" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1482" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Evelyn describes the new fashion as “a comely dress after y<sup>e</sup> Persian mode” (see <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diary</i>, October 18th, 1666). He adds that he had described the “comelinesse and usefulnesse” of the Persian clothing in his pamphlet entitled <i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">Tyrannus, or the Mode</i>. “I do not impute to this discourse the change which soone happen’d, but it was an identity I could not but take notice of.”</p>
					<p>Rugge, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diurnal</i>, thus describes the new Court costume “1666, <abbr>Oct.</abbr> 11. In this month His Majestie and whole Court changed the fashion of their clothes-<abbr>viz.</abbr> a close coat of cloth, pinkt with a white taffety under the cutts. This in length reached the calf of the leg, and upon that a sercoat cutt at the breast, which hung loose and shorter than the vest six inches. The breeches the Spanish cut, and buskins some of cloth, some of leather, but of the same colour as the vest or garment; of never the like fashion since William the Conqueror.” It is represented in a portrait of Lord Arlington, by Sir <abbr class="name">P.</abbr> Lely, formerly belonging to Lord de Clifford, and engraved in Lodge’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Portraits</i>. Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span> ordered his servants to wear the dress. See November 22. <a href="../text/chapter-82.xhtml#noteref-1482" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1483" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The King of Denmark was induced to conclude a treaty with the United Provinces, a secret article of which bound him to declare war against England. The order in council for the printing and publishing a declaration of war against Denmark is dated “Whitehall, <abbr>Sept.</abbr> 19, 1666;” annexed is “A True Declaration of all transactions between his Majesty of Great Britain and the King of Denmark, with a declaration of war against the said king, and the motives that obliged his Majesty thereunto” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Calendar of State Papers</i>, 1666⁠–⁠67, <abbr>p.</abbr> 140). <a href="../text/chapter-82.xhtml#noteref-1483" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1484" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>In the instructions given to Sir Thomas Clifford (August 5th, 1666) to be communicated to Prince Rupert and the Duke of Albemarle, we read: “to tell them that the complaint of Sir Jeremy Smith’s misbehaviour in the late engagement being so universal, unless he have fully satisfied the generals he should be brought to trial by court-martial, and there purged or condemned.” The Duke of Albemarle answered the king (August 14th?): “Wishes to clear a gallant man falsely accused, Sir Jeremiah Smith, who had more men killed and hurt, and his ship received more shot than any in the fleet. There is not a more spirited man serves in the fleet” On October 27th <abbr class="name">H.</abbr> Muddiman wrote to Sir Edward Stradling: “Sir Jeremy Smith has got as much credit by his late examination as his enemies wished him disgrace, the King and Duke of York being fully satisfied of his valour in the engagement. It appears that he had 147 men killed and wounded, while the most eminent of his accusers had but two or three.” With regard to Sir Jeremy’s counter-charges, we read: “<abbr>Nov.</abbr> 3. The King having maturely considered the charges brought against Sir <abbr class="name">Rob.</abbr> Holmes by Sir Jeremy Smith, finds no cause to suspect Sir Robert of cowardice in the fight with the Dutch of June 25 and 26, but thinks that on the night of the 26th he yielded too easily to the opinion of his pilot, without consulting those of the other ships, muzzled his ship, and thus obliged the squadron to do the same, and so the enemy, which might have been driven into the body of the king’s fleet, then returning from the pursuit, was allowed to escape” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Calendar of State Papers</i>,” 1666⁠–⁠67, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 14, 40, 222, 236). <a href="../text/chapter-82.xhtml#noteref-1484" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1485" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Jessemin (<i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Jasminum</i>), the flowers of which are of a delicate sweet smell, and often used to perfume gloves. Edmund Howes, Stows continuator, informs us that sweet or perfumed gloves were first brought into England by the Earl of Oxford on his return from Italy, in the fifteenth year of Queen Elizabeth, during whose reign, and long afterwards, they were very fashionable. They are frequently mentioned by Shakespeare. Autolyctis, in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Winter’s Tale</i>, has among his wares⁠—“Gloves as sweet as damask roses.”⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-82.xhtml#noteref-1485" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1486" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“<abbr>Nov.</abbr> 9th. Between seven and eight at night, there happened a fire in the Horse Guard House, in the Tilt Yard, over against Whitehall, which at first arising, it is supposed, from some snuff of a candle falling amongst the straw, broke out with so sudden a flame, that at once it seized the northwest part of that building; but being so close under His Majesty’s own eye, it was, by the timely help His Majesty and His Royal Highness caused to be applied, immediately stopped, and by ten o’clock wholly mastered, with the loss only of that part of the building it had at first seized.”</p>
						<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">The London Gazette</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 103</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-83.xhtml#noteref-1486" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1487" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A beverage consisting of ale mixed with sugar, nutmeg, and the pulp of roasted apples. “A cupp of lamb’s-wool they dranke unto him then.” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The King and the Miller of Mansfield</i> (Percy’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reliques</i>, Series <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 20). <a href="../text/chapter-83.xhtml#noteref-1487" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1488" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>St.</abbr> Helen’s. <a href="../text/chapter-83.xhtml#noteref-1488" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1489" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>William Croune, or Croone, of Emanuel College, Cambridge, chosen Rhetoric Professor at Gresham College, 1659, <abbr>F.R.S.</abbr> and <abbr>M.D.</abbr> Died October 12th, 1684, and was interred at <abbr>St.</abbr> Mildred’s in the Poultry. He was a prominent Fellow of the Royal Society and first Registrar. In accordance with his wishes his widow (who married Sir Edwin Sadleir, <abbr>Bart.</abbr>) left by will one-fifth of the clear rent of the King’s Head tavern in or near Old Fish Street, at the corner of Lambeth Hill, to the Royal Society for the support of a lecture and illustrative experiments for the advancement of natural knowledge on local motion. The Croonian lecture is still delivered before the Royal Society. <a href="../text/chapter-83.xhtml#noteref-1489" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1490" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>At the meeting on November 14th, “the experiment of transfusing the blood of one dog into another was made before the Society by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> King and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Thomas Coxe upon a little mastiff and a spaniel with very good success, the former bleeding to death, and the latter receiving the blood of the other, and emitting so much of his own, as to make him capable of receiving that of the other.” On November 21st the spaniel “was produced and found very well” (Birch’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of the Royal Society</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 123, 125). The experiment of transfusion of blood, which occupied much of the attention of the Royal Society in its early days, was revived within the last few years. <a href="../text/chapter-83.xhtml#noteref-1490" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1491" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>William Chiffinch, pimp to Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> and receiver of the secret pensions paid by the French Court. He succeeded his brother, Thomas Chiffinch (who died in April, 1666), as Keeper of the King’s Private Closet (see note, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 265). He is introduced by Scott into his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Peveril of the Peak</i>. <a href="../text/chapter-83.xhtml#noteref-1491" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1492" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>According to the Bills of Mortality seven persons died in London of the plague during the week November 20th to 27th; and for some weeks after deaths continued from this cause. <a href="../text/chapter-83.xhtml#noteref-1492" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1493" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>William Fielding, writing to Sir <abbr class="name">Phil.</abbr> Musgrave from Carlisle on November 15th, says: “Major Baxter, who has arrived from Dumfries, reports that this morning a great number of horse and foot came into that town, with drawn swords and pistols, gallopped up to Sir <abbr class="name">Jas.</abbr> Turner’s lodgings, seized him in his bed, carried him without clothes to the marketplace, threatened to cut him to pieces, and seized and put into the Tollbooth all the foot soldiers that were with him; they also secured the minister of Dumfries. Many of the party were lairds and county people from Galloway⁠—200 horse well mounted, one minister was with them who had swords and pistols, and 200 or 300 foot, some with clubs, others with scythes.” On November 17th <abbr class="name">Rob.</abbr> Meine wrote to Williamson: “On the 15th 120 fanatics from the Glenkins, Deray; and neighbouring parishes in Dumfriesshire, none worth £10 except two mad fellows, the lairds of Barscob and Corsuck, came to Dumfries early in the morning, seized Sir <abbr class="name">Jas.</abbr> Turner, commander of a company of men in Dumfriesshire, and carried him, without violence to others, to a strong house in Maxwell town, Galloway, declaring they sought only revenge against the tyrant who had been severe with them for not keeping to church, and had laid their families waste” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Calendar of State Papers</i>, 1666⁠–⁠67, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 262, 268). <a href="../text/chapter-83.xhtml#noteref-1493" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1494" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Planché throws some doubt on this story in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Cyclopædia of Costume</i> (<abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 240), and asks the question, “Was <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Batelier hoaxing the inquisitive secretary, or was it the idle gossip of the day, as untrustworthy as such gossip is in general?” But the same statement was made by the author of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Character of a Trimmer</i>, who wrote from actual knowledge of the Court: “About this time a general humour, in opposition to France, had made us throw off their fashion, and put on vests, that we might look more like a distinct people, and not be under the servility of imitation, which ever pays a greater deference to the original than is consistent with the equality all independent nations should pretend to. France did not like this small beginning of ill humours, at least of emulation; and wisely considering, that it is a natural introduction, first to make the world their apes, that they may be afterwards their slaves. It was thought, that one of the instructions Madame [Henrietta, Duchess of Orleans] brought along with her, was to laugh us out of these vests; which she performed so effectually, that in a moment, like so many footmen who had quitted their master’s livery, we all took it again, and returned to our old service; so that the very time of doing it gave a very critical advantage to France, since it looked like an evidence of our returning to her interest, as well as to their fashion. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Character of a Trimmer</i> (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Miscellanies by the Marquis of Halifax</i>, 1704, <abbr>p.</abbr> 164). Evelyn reports that when the king expressed his intention never to alter this fashion, “divers courtiers and gentlemen gave his Majesty gold by way of wager that he would not persist in this resolution” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diary</i>, October 18th, 1666). <a href="../text/chapter-83.xhtml#noteref-1494" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1495" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Hilton’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Catch that catch can, or a Choice Collection of Catches, Rounds and Canons for 3 or 4 voyces</i>, was first published by Playford in 1651 or 1652. The book was republished “with large additions by John Playford” in 1658. The edition referred to in the text was published in 1667 with a second title of “The Musical Companion.” The book was republished in 1672⁠–⁠73. <a href="../text/chapter-83.xhtml#noteref-1495" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1496" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Apparently a translation of the French <i xml:lang="fr">contre le gré</i>, and presumably an expression in common use. “Against the grain” is generally supposed to have its origin in the use of a plane against the grain of the wood. <a href="../text/chapter-83.xhtml#noteref-1496" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1497" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>They had quarrelled (see August 26th). She, perhaps, was piqued at Lord Hinchingbroke’s refusal “to compass the thing without consent of friends” (see February 25th), whence her expression, “indifferent” to have her. It is worthy of remark that their children intermarried; Lord Hinchingbroke’s son married Lady Rochester’s daughter.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-83.xhtml#noteref-1497" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1498" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Of the lady thus sought after, whom Pepys calls “a beauty” as well as a fortune, and who shortly afterwards, about the 4th February, 1667, became the wife of the Earl of Rochester, then not twenty years old, no authentic portrait is known to exist. When <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Miller, of Albemarle Street, in 1811, proposed to publish an edition of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Memoires de Grammont</i>, he sent an artist to Windsor to copy there the portraits which he could find of those who figure in that work. In the list given to him for this purpose was the name of Lady Rochester. Not finding amongst the “Beauties,” or elsewhere, any genuine portrait of her, but seeing that by Hamilton she is absurdly styled <i xml:lang="fr">une triste héritière</i>, the artist made a drawing from some unknown portrait at Windsor of a lady of a sorrowful countenance, and palmed it off upon the bookseller. In the edition of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Grammont</i> it is not actually called Lady Rochester, but <i epub:type="se:name.publication.engraving">La Triste Héritière</i>. A similar falsification had been practised in Edwards’s edition of 1793, but a different portrait had been copied. It is needless, almost, to remark how ill applied is Hamilton’s epithet.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-83.xhtml#noteref-1498" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1499" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The fire continued burning in some cellars of the ruins of the city for four months, though it rained in the month of October ten days without ceasing (Rugge’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diurnal</i>).⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-84.xhtml#noteref-1499" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1500" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Cow Lane, West Smithfield (now named King Street), was famous for its coachmakers. <a href="../text/chapter-84.xhtml#noteref-1500" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1501" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Two thousand pounds of this sum went to Alderman Edward Bakewell for two diamond rings, severally charged £1,000 and £900, bought March 14th, 1665⁠–⁠66 (Second addenda to Steinman’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoir of the Duchess of Cleveland</i>, privately printed, 1878, <abbr>p.</abbr> 4). <a href="../text/chapter-84.xhtml#noteref-1501" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1502" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Gazette</i> of April 23rd-26th, 1666, which contains the following remarkable passage: “At the Sessions in the Old Bailey, John Rathbone, an old army colonel, William Saunders, Henry Tucker, Thomas Flint, Thomas Evans, John Myles, <abbr class="name">Will.</abbr> Westcot, and John Cole, officers or soldiers in the late Rebellion, were indicted for conspiring the death of his Majesty and the overthrow of the Government. Having laid their plot and contrivance for the surprisal of the Tower, the killing his Grace the Lord General, Sir John Robinson, Lieutenant of the Tower, and Sir Richard Brown; and then to have declared for an equal division of lands, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> The better to effect this hellish design, the City was to have been fired, and the portcullis let down to keep out all assistance; and the Horse Guards to have been surprised in the inns where they were quartered, several ostlers having been gained for that purpose. The Tower was accordingly viewed, and its surprise ordered by boats over the moat, and from thence to scale the wall. One Alexander, not yet taken, had likewise distributed money to these conspirators; and, for the carrying on the design more effectually, they were told of a Council of the great ones that sat frequently in London, from whom issued all orders; which Council received their directions from another in Holland, who sat with the States; and that the third of September was pitched on for the attempt, as being found by Lilly’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Almanack</i>, and a scheme erected for that purpose, to be a lucky day, a planet then ruling which prognosticated the downfall of Monarchy. The evidence against these persons was very full and clear, and they were accordingly found guilty of High Treason.” See November 10th, 1666⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-84.xhtml#noteref-1502" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1503" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>In a broadside (1680), quoted by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">G. T.</abbr> Drury in his edition of Waller’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Poems</i>, 1893, satirical reference is made to the fashionable form of advice to the painters:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>“Each puny brother of the rhyming trade</span>
							<br/>
							<span>At every turn implores the Painter’s aid,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And fondly enamoured of own foul brat</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Cries in an ecstacy, Paint this, draw that.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>The series was continued, for we find <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Advice to a Painter upon the Defeat of the Rebels in the West and the Execution of the late Duke of Monmouth</i> (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Poems on Affairs of State</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 148); <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Advice to a Painter, being a Satire on the French King</i>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, 1692, and <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Advice to a Painter</i>, 1697 (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Poems on Affairs of State</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 428). <a href="../text/chapter-84.xhtml#noteref-1503" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1504" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>It was called “A Bill for raising part of the supply for his Majesty by an imposition on Sealed Paper and Parchment”⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-84.xhtml#noteref-1504" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1505" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Quick or ready, a naval term frequently used by Shakespeare. <a href="../text/chapter-84.xhtml#noteref-1505" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1506" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A mazer or drinking-bowl turned out of some kind of wood, by preference of maple, and especially the spotted or speckled variety called “bird’s-eye maple” (see <abbr class="name">W. H. <abbr>St.</abbr></abbr> John Hope’s paper, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">On the English Medieval Drinking-bowls called Mazers</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Archæologia</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> 50, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 129⁠–⁠93). <a href="../text/chapter-85.xhtml#noteref-1506" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1507" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>In the “Bill against importing Cattle from Ireland and other parts beyond the Seas,” the Lords proposed to insert “Detriment and Mischief” in place of “Nuisance,” but the Commons stood to their word, and gained their way. The Lords finally consented that “Nuisance” should stand in the Bill. <a href="../text/chapter-85.xhtml#noteref-1507" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1508" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>On this day “An Act for raising Money by a Poll and otherwise towards the maintenance of the present War,” and “An Act prohibiting the Importation of Cattle from Ireland and other parts beyond the Sea, and Fish taken by Foreigners,” were passed. The king. complained of the insufficient supply, and said, “ ’Tis high time for you to make good your promises, and ’tis high time for you to be in the country” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Journals of the House of Lords</i>,” <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 81). <a href="../text/chapter-85.xhtml#noteref-1508" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1509" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Fabio Chigi, of Siena, succeeded Innocent <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span> in 1655 as Alexander <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. He died May, 1667, and was succeeded by Clement <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>. <a href="../text/chapter-85.xhtml#noteref-1509" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1510" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Pieces of “the Cross” were formerly held in such veneration, and were so common, that it has been often said enough existed to build a ship. Most readers will remember the distinction which Sir <abbr>W.</abbr> Scott represents Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span> (with great appreciation of that monarch’s character), as drawing between an oath taken on a false piece and one taken on a piece of the <em>true</em> cross. Sir Thomas More, a very devout believer in relics, says (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Works</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 119), that Luther wished, in a sermon of his, that he had in his hand all the pieces of the Holy Cross; and said that if he so had, he would throw them there as never sun should shine on them:⁠—and for what worshipful reason would the wretch do such villainy to the cross of Christ? Because, as he saith, that there is so much gold now bestowed about the garnishing of the pieces of the Cross, that there is none left for poore folke. Is not this a high reason? As though all the gold that is now bestowed about the pieces of the Holy Cross would not have failed to have been given to poor men, if they had not been bestowed about the garnishing of the Cross! and as though there were nothing lost, but what is bestowed about Christ’s Cross!” Wolsey, says Cavendish, on his fall, gave to Norris, who brought him a ring of gold as a token of good will from Henry, “a little chaine of gold, made like a bottle chain, with a cross of gold, wherein was a piece of the Holy Cross, which he continually wore about his neck, next his body; and said, furthermore, ‘Master Norris, I assure you, when I was in prosperity, although it seem but small in value, yet I would not gladly have departed with the same for a thousand pounds.’ ” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> 1852, <abbr>p.</abbr> 167. Evelyn mentions, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diary</i>, November 17th, 1664, that he saw in one of the chapels in <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter’s a crucifix with a piece of the true cross in it. Amongst the jewels of Mary Queen of Scots was a cross of gold, which had been pledged to Hume of Blackadder for £1,000 (Chalmers’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 31).⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-85.xhtml#noteref-1510" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1511" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Dormitory. The French word was commonly userd, and it was also anglicized as <em>dorter</em> and <em>dortour</em>. The latter word was used by Spenser (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Faerie Queene</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xii</span>, 24). “This is a very fine convent with a very fine dortoire.”⁠—<abbr class="name">M.</abbr> Lister, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Journey to Paris</i>, 1699, <abbr>p.</abbr> 131. <a href="../text/chapter-85.xhtml#noteref-1511" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1512" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The passage between brackets is written in the margin of the <abbr class="eoc">MS.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-85.xhtml#noteref-1512" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1513" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>There is little reason to doubt that it was such as Evelyn describes it at a later time. “I can never forget the inexpressible luxury and prophaneness, gaming, and all dissoluteness, and, as it were, total forgetfulness of God (it being Sunday evening) which this day se’nnight I was witness of; the King sitting and toying with his concubines, Portsmouth, Cleveland, Mazarin, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> A French boy singing love songs in that glorious gallery, whilst about twenty of the great courtiers and other dissolute persons were at basset round a large table, a bank of at least £2,000 in gold before them; upon which two gentlemen who were with me made reflections with astonishment. Six days after was all in the dust.”⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diary</i>, February, 1685.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-85.xhtml#noteref-1513" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1514" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Antigua, one of the West India Islands (Leeward Islands), discovered by Columbus in 1493, who is said to have named it after a church at Seville called Santa Maria la Antigua. It was first settled by a few English families in 1632, and in 1663 another settlement was made under Lord Willoughby, to whom the entire island was granted by Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. In 1666 it was invaded by a French force, which laid waste all the settlement. It was reconquered by the English, and formally restored to them by the treaty of Breda. <a href="../text/chapter-85.xhtml#noteref-1514" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1515" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The passage between brackets is written in the margin of the <abbr class="eoc">MS.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-86.xhtml#noteref-1515" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1516" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Michael Nostradamus, a physician and astrologer, born in the diocese of Avignon, 1503. Amongst other predictions, one was interpreted as foreshowing the singular death of <abbr class="name">Hen.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> of France, by which his reputation was increased. <a href="../text/chapter-86.xhtml#noteref-1516" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1517" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Lover. <a href="../text/chapter-86.xhtml#noteref-1517" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1518" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Ben Jonson’s well-known play. <a href="../text/chapter-86.xhtml#noteref-1518" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1519" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><dfn><i xml:lang="es">Muger</i></dfn> = wife in Spanish. <a href="../text/chapter-86.xhtml#noteref-1519" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1520" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Like hermit poor in pensive place obscure</i> is found in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Phœnix Nest</i>, 1593, and in <abbr>Harl. MS. No.</abbr> 6910, written soon after 1596. It was set to music by Alfonso Ferrabosco, and published in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ayres</i>, 1609. The song was a favourite with Izaak Walton, and is alluded to in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Hudibras</i> (Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, canto <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, line 1169). See Rimbault’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Little Book of Songs and Ballads</i>, 1851, <abbr>p.</abbr> 98. Both versions of the famous ballad of “Chevy Chase” are printed in Percy’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Reliques</i>. <a href="../text/chapter-86.xhtml#noteref-1520" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1521" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The gondolas mentioned before, as sent by the Doge of Venice. See September 12th, 1661. <a href="../text/chapter-86.xhtml#noteref-1521" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1522" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Burnet wrote (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of his Own Time</i>, book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>): “An act passed in this session for rebuilding the city of London, which gave Lord Chief Justice Hale a great reputation, for it was drawn with so true a judgment, and so great foresight, that the whole city was raised out of its ashes without any suits of law.” <a href="../text/chapter-86.xhtml#noteref-1522" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1523" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>See Sir Christopher Wren’s “Proposals for rebuilding the City of London after the great fire, with an engraved Plan of the principal Streets and Public Buildings,” in Elmes’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoirs of Sir Christopher Wren</i>, Appendix, <abbr>p.</abbr> 61. The originals are in All Souls’ College Library, Oxford.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-86.xhtml#noteref-1523" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1524" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“One Hubert, a French papist, was seized in Essex, as he was getting out of the way in great confusion. He confessed he had begun the fire, and persisted in his confession to his death, for he was hanged upon no other evidence but that of his own confession. It is true he gave so broken an account of the whole matter that he was thought mad. Yet he was blindfolded, and carried to several places of the city, and then his eyes being opened, he was asked if that was the place, and he being carried to wrong places, after he looked round about for some time, he said that was not the place, but when he was brought to the place where it first broke out, he affirmed that was the true place.”</p>
						<cite>Burnet’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Own Time</i>, book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Archbishop Tillotson, according to Burnet, believed that London was burnt by design. <a href="../text/chapter-86.xhtml#noteref-1524" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1525" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Brushwood, or faggots used for lighting fires. <a href="../text/chapter-86.xhtml#noteref-1525" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1526" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Woolwich stones, still collected in that locality, are simply waterworn pebbles of flint, which, when broken with a hammer, exhibit on the smooth surface some resemblance to the human face; and their possessors are thus enabled to trace likenesses of friends, or eminent public characters. The late <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Tennant, the geologist, of the Strand, had a collection of such stones. In the British Museum is a nodule of globular or Egyptian jasper, which, in its fracture, bears a striking resemblance to the well-known portrait of Chaucer. It is engraved in Rymsdyk’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Museum Britannicum</i>, <abbr>tab.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxviii</span>. A flint, showing <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pitt’s face, used once to be exhibited at the meetings of the Pitt Club.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-86.xhtml#noteref-1526" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1527" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Money paid to men who enlist into the public service; press money. So called because those who receive it are to be prest or ready when called on (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Encyclopædic Dictionary</i>). <a href="../text/chapter-86.xhtml#noteref-1527" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1528" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>From <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Poor Robin’s Almanack</i> for 1757 it appears that, in former times in England, a Welshman was burnt in effigy on this anniversary. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">W. C.</abbr> Hazlitt, in his edition of Brand’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Popular Antiquities</i>, adds “The practice to which Pepys refers … was very common at one time; and till very lately bakers made gingerbread Welshmen, called taffies, on <abbr>St.</abbr> David’s day, which were made to represent a man skewered” (<abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 60, 61). <a href="../text/chapter-87.xhtml#noteref-1528" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1529" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“Her skill increasing with her years, other poets sought to obtain recommendations of her wit and beauty to the success of their writings. I have said that Dryden was one of the principal supporters of the King’s house, and ere long in one of his new plays a principal character was set apart for the popular comedian. The drama was a tragicomedy called ‘Secret Love, or the Maiden Queen,’ and an additional interest was attached to its production from the king having suggested the plot to its author, and calling it ‘his play.’ ”</p>
						<cite>Cunningham’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Story of Nell Gwyn</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> 1892, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 38, 39</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-87.xhtml#noteref-1529" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1530" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Two of our greatest poets have drawn the character of the Duke of Buckingham in brilliant verse, and both have condemned him to infamy. There is enough in Pepys’s reports to corroborate the main features of Dryden’s magnificent portrait of Zimri in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Absolom and Achitophel</i>:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“In the first rank of these did Zimri stand;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>A man so various that he seemed to be</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Not one, but all mankind’s epitome;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Stiff in opinions, always in the wrong;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Was everything by starts, and nothing long,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But, in the course of one revolving moon,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Was chymist, fiddler, statesman, and buffoon;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Then all for women, painting, rhyming, drinking,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Besides ten thousand freaks that died in thinking,</span>
						</p>
						<hr/>
						<p>
							<span>He laughed himself from Court, then sought relief</span>
							<br/>
							<span>By forming parties, but could ne’er be chief.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Pope’s facts are not correct, and hence the effect of his picture is impaired. In spite of the duke’s constant visits to the Tower, Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> still continued his friend; but on the death of the king, expecting little from James, he retired to his estate at Helmsley, in Yorkshire, to nurse his property and to restore his constitution. He died on April 16th, 1687, at Kirkby Moorside, after a few days’ illness, caused by sitting on the damp grass when heated from a fox chase. The scene of his death was the house of a tenant, not “the worst inn’s worst room” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Moral Essays</i>, <abbr>epist.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>). He was buried in Westminster Abbey. <a href="../text/chapter-87.xhtml#noteref-1530" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1531" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Loyal London</i> was the ship given to the king by the City. It was launched at Deptford on June 10th, 1666. <a href="../text/chapter-87.xhtml#noteref-1531" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1532" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Richard Cumberland, afterwards Bishop of Peterborough. <a href="../text/chapter-87.xhtml#noteref-1532" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1533" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>There are references to the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Phœnix</i>, a Dutch ship taken as a prize, among the State Papers (see <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Calendar</i>, 1666⁠–⁠67, <abbr>p.</abbr> 404). Pepys appears to have got into trouble at a later date in respect to this same ship, for among the Rawlinson <abbr>MSS.</abbr> (<abbr>A.</abbr> 170) are “Papers relating to the charge brought against him in the House of Commons in 1689 with reference to the ship <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Phœnix</i> and the East India Company in 1681⁠–⁠86.” <a href="../text/chapter-87.xhtml#noteref-1533" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1534" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The passage between brackets is written in the margin of the <abbr class="eoc">MS.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-88.xhtml#noteref-1534" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1535" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The practice of giving alms on Maundy Thursday to poor men and women equal in number to the years of the sovereign’s age is a curious survival in an altered form of an old custom. The original custom was for the king to wash the feet of twelve poor persons, and to give them a supper in imitation of Christ’s last supper and his washing of the Apostles’ feet. James <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> was the last sovereign to perform the ceremony in person, but it was performed by deputy so late as 1731. The Archbishop of York was the king’s deputy on that occasion. The institution has passed through the various stages of feet washing with a supper, the discontinuance of the feet washing, the substitution of a gift of provisions for the supper, and finally the substitution of a gift of money for the provisions. The ceremony took place at the Chapel Royal, Whitehall; but it is now held at Westminster Abbey. Maundy is derived from the Latin word <i xml:lang="la">maudatum</i>, which commences the original anthem sung during the ceremony, in reference to Christ’s command. <a href="../text/chapter-88.xhtml#noteref-1535" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1536" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This play was entitled <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Sawney the Scot, or the Taming of a Shrew</i>, and consisted of an alteration of Shakespeare’s play by John Lacy. Although it had long been popular it was not printed until 1698. In the old <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Taming of a Shrew</i> (1594), reprinted by Thomas Amyot for the Shakespeare Society in 1844, the hero’s servant is named Sander, and this seems to have given the hint to Lacy, when altering Shakespeare’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Taming of <em>the</em> Shrew</i>, to foist a Scotsman into the action. Sawney was one of Lacy’s favourite characters, and occupies a prominent position in Michael Wright’s picture at Hampton Court. Evelyn, on October 3rd, 1662, “visited <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Wright, a Scotsman, who had liv’d long at Rome, and was esteem’d a good painter,” and he singles out as his best picture, “Lacy, the famous Roscius, or comedian, whom he has painted in three dresses, as a gallant, a Presbyterian minister, and a Scotch Highlander in his plaid.” Langbaine and Aubrey both make the mistake of ascribing the third figure to Teague in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Committee</i>; and in spite of Evelyn’s clear statement, his editor in a note follows them in their blunder. Planché has reproduced the picture in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Costume</i> (<abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 243). <a href="../text/chapter-88.xhtml#noteref-1536" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1537" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>See November 5th, 1664. Downes wrote: “<i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Tragedy of Macbeth</i>, alter’d by Sir William Davenant; being drest in all it’s finery, as new cloaths, new scenes, machines as flyings for the Witches; with all the singing and dancing in it. The first compos’d by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lock, the other by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Channell and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Joseph Preist; it being all excellently perform’d, being in the nature of an opera, it recompenc’d double the expense; it proves still a lasting play.” <a href="../text/chapter-88.xhtml#noteref-1537" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1538" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A form once so commonly used for asparagus that it has found its way into dictionaries. <a href="../text/chapter-88.xhtml#noteref-1538" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1539" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Hackney was long famous for its boarding schools. <a href="../text/chapter-88.xhtml#noteref-1539" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1540" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Among the State Papers is a document dated July 8th, 1667, in which we read: “At Breda, the business is so far advanced that the English have relinquished their pretensions to the ships <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Henry Bonaventure</i> and <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Good Hope</i>. The matter sticks only at Poleron; the States have resolved not to part with it, though the English should have a right to it” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Calendar</i>, 1667, <abbr>p.</abbr> 278). <a href="../text/chapter-88.xhtml#noteref-1540" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1541" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>See November 8th, 1664. <a href="../text/chapter-88.xhtml#noteref-1541" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1542" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>William Legge, eldest son of Edward Legge, sometime Vice-President of Munster, born 1609(?). He served under Maurice of Nassau and Gustavus Adolphus, and held the rank of colonel in the Royalist army. He closely attached himself to Prince Rupert, and was an active agent in affecting the reconciliation between that prince and his uncle Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. Colonel Legge distinguished himself in several actions, and was wounded and taken prisoner at the battle of Worcester; it was said that he would have “been executed if his wife had not contrived his escape from Coventry gaol in her own clothes.” He was Groom of the Bedchamber to Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, and also to Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>; he held the offices of Master of the Armories and Lieutenant-General of the Ordnance. He refused honours (a knighthood from Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> and an earldom from Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>), but his eldest son George was created Baron Dartmouth in 1682. He died October 13th, 1672, at his house in the Minories, and was buried in Trinity Church, Minories, where there is a monument to his memory. A portrait of Colonel Legge, by Huysman, is in the possession of the Earl of Dartmouth. There is an excellent life of Legge, by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> <abbr class="name">C. H.</abbr> Firth, in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dictionary of National Biography</i>. <a href="../text/chapter-88.xhtml#noteref-1542" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1543" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> and Henrietta Maria. <a href="../text/chapter-88.xhtml#noteref-1543" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1544" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Eleanor, daughter of Robert Needham, Viscount Kilmurrey, and widow of Peter Warburton, became in 1644 the second wife of John Byron, first Lord Byron. Died 1663.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-88.xhtml#noteref-1544" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1545" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Louis made his own bastards dukes and princes, and legitimatized them as much as he could, connecting them also by marriage with the real blood-royal.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-88.xhtml#noteref-1545" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1546" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Louise Francoise de la Baume le Blanc de la Vallière had four children by Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span>, of whom only two survived-Marie Anne Bourbon, called Mademoiselle de Blois, born in 1666, afterwards married to the Prince de Conti, and the Comte de Vermandois, born in 1667. In that year (the very year in which Evelyn was giving this account to Pepys), the Duchy of Vaujour and two baronies were created in favour of La Vallière, and her daughter, who, in the deed of creation, was legitimatized, and styled princess.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-88.xhtml#noteref-1546" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1547" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Even at a much later time <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Godolphin well resolved “not to talk foolishly to men, <em>more especially</em> <strong>the King</strong>,”⁠—“be sure <em>never to talk to</em> <strong>the King</strong>” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life</i>, by Evelyn). These expressions speak volumes as to Charles’s character.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-88.xhtml#noteref-1547" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1548" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Evelyn evidently believed the Duchess of Richmond to be innocent; and his testimony, coupled with her own declaration, ought to weigh down all the scandal which Pepys reports from other sources.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-88.xhtml#noteref-1548" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1549" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>On the 1st of May milkmaids used to borrow silver cups, tankards, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, to hang them round their milkpails, with the addition of flowers and ribbons, which they carried upon their heads, accompanied by a bagpipe or fiddle, and went from door to door, dancing before the houses of their customers, in order to obtain a small gratuity from each of them.</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“In London thirty years ago,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">When pretty milkmaids went about,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>It was a goodly sight to see</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">Their Mayday pageant all drawn out.</span>
						</p>
						<hr/>
						<p>
							<span>“Such scenes and sounds once blest my eyes</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">And charm’d my ears; but all have vanish’d,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>On Mayday now no garlands go,</span>
							<br/>
							<span class="i1">For milkmaids and their dance are banish’d.”</span>
						</p>
						<cite>Hone’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Every-Day Book</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 569, 570.</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Mayday customs have nearly died out, but the editor saw a jack-in-the-green with men dressed as milkmaids dancing round it on May 1st of the present year (1895) in one of the streets near Primrose Hill. There has been a great revival of Mayday decoration on carthorses within the last few years. <a href="../text/chapter-89.xhtml#noteref-1549" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1550" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Frith of Forth. See 5th of this month. <a href="../text/chapter-89.xhtml#noteref-1550" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1551" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>At Newcastle House, Clerkenwell Close, the duke and duchess lived in great state. The house was divided, and let in tenements in the eighteenth century. <a href="../text/chapter-89.xhtml#noteref-1551" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1552" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Randle Holmes says the ladies wore “false locks set on wyres, to make them stand at a distance from the head,” and accompanies the information with the figure of a lady “with a pair of locks and curls which were in great fashion in 1670” (Planché’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Cyclopædia of Costume</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 248). <a href="../text/chapter-89.xhtml#noteref-1552" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1553" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A new light is thrown upon this favourite expression of Pepys’s when speaking of his wife by the following quotation from a Midland wordbook:</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“Wretch, <abbr>n.</abbr>, often used as an expression of endearment or sympathy. Old Woman to Young Master: ‘An’ ’ow is the missis today, <em>poor wretch</em>?’ Of a boy going to school a considerable distance off ‘I met ’im with a bit o’ bread in ’is bag, <em>poor wretch</em>’ ”</p>
						<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A Glossary of Words and Phrases used in <abbr class="compass">S.E.</abbr> Worcestershire</i>, by Jesse Salisbury. Published by the English Dialect Society, 1894</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-89.xhtml#noteref-1553" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1554" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Nova Scotia and the adjoining countries were called by the French Acadie. Pepys is not the only official personage whose ignorance of Nova Scotia is on record. A story is current of a prime minister (Duke of Newcastle) who was surprised at hearing Cape Breton was an island. “Egad, I’ll go tell the King Cape Breton is an island!” Of the same it is said, that when told Annapolis was in danger, and ought to be defended: “Oh! certainly Annapolis must be defended⁠—where is Annapolis?”⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-89.xhtml#noteref-1554" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1555" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The passage between brackets is written in the margin of the <abbr class="eoc">MS.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-89.xhtml#noteref-1555" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1556" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>During a very high flood in the meadows between Huntingdon and Godmanchester, something was seen floating, which the Godmanchester people thought was a black pig, and the Huntingdon folk declared it was a sturgeon; when rescued from the waters, it proved to be a young donkey. This mistake led to the one party being styled “Godmanchester black pigs,” and the other “Huntingdon sturgeons,” terms not altogether forgotten at this day. Pepys’s colt must be taken to be the colt of an ass.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-89.xhtml#noteref-1556" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1557" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>If we are to credit the following paragraph, extracted from the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Morning Post</i> of May 2nd, 1791, the virtues of May dew were then still held in some estimation; for it records that “on the day preceding, according to annual and superstitious custom, a number of persons went into the fields, and bathed their faces with the dew on the grass, under the idea that it would render them beautiful” (Hone’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Every Day Book</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 611). Aubrey speaks of May dew as “a great dissolvent” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Miscellanies</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 183).⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-89.xhtml#noteref-1557" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1558" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Hydrostatical Paradoxes made out by New Experiments</i> was published by the <abbr>Hon.</abbr> Robert Boyle in 1666 (Oxford). <a href="../text/chapter-90.xhtml#noteref-1558" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1559" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>It was an ancient custom in Berkshire, when a man had beaten his wife, for the neighbours to parade in front of his house, for the purpose of serenading him with kettles, and horns and hand-bells, and every species of “rough music,” by which name the ceremony was designated. Perhaps the riding mentioned by Pepys was a punishment somewhat similar. Malcolm (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Manners of London</i>) quotes from the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Protestant Mercury</i>, that a porter’s lady, who resided near Strand Lane, beat her husband with so much violence and perseverance, that the poor man was compelled to leap out of the window to escape her fury. Exasperated at this virago, the neighbours made a “riding,” <abbr>i.e.</abbr> a pedestrian procession, headed by a drum, and accompanied by a chemise, displayed for a banner. The manual musician sounded the tune of “You round-headed cuckolds, come dig, come dig!” and nearly seventy coalheavers, carmen, and porters, adorned with large horns fastened to their heads, followed. The public seemed highly pleased with the nature of the punishment, and gave liberally to the vindicators of injured manhood.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-90.xhtml#noteref-1559" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1560" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Golden Hand</i> was to have been used for the conveyance of the Swedish Ambassadors’ horses and goods to Holland. In August, 1667, Frances, widow of Captain Douglas and daughter of Lord Grey, petitioned the king “for a gift of the prize ship <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Golden Hand</i>, now employed in weighing the ships sunk at Chatham, where her husband lost his life in defence of the ships against the Dutch” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Calendar of State Papers</i>, 1667, <abbr>p.</abbr> 430) <a href="../text/chapter-90.xhtml#noteref-1560" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1561" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>There had been correspondence with Pett respecting this chain in April and May. On the 10th May Pett wrote to the Navy Commissioners, “The chain is promised to be dispatched tomorrow, and all things are ready for fixing it.” On the 11th June the Dutch “got twenty or twenty-two ships over the narrow part of the river at Chatham, where ships had been sunk; after two and a half hours’ fighting one guard-ship after another was fired and blown up, and the enemy master of the chain” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Calendar of State Papers</i>, 1667, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 58, 87, 215). <a href="../text/chapter-90.xhtml#noteref-1561" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1562" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Vandervelde’s drawings of the conflagration of the English fleet, made by him on the spot, are in the British Museum.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-90.xhtml#noteref-1562" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1563" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Below London Bridge. <a href="../text/chapter-90.xhtml#noteref-1563" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1564" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The want of ammunition when the Dutch burnt the fleet, and the revenge of the deserter sailors, are well described by Marvell:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“Our Seamen, whom no danger’s shape could fright,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Unpaid, refuse to mount their ships, for spite</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Or to their fellows swim, on board the Dutch,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who show the tempting metal in their clutch.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Oft had he [Monk] sent, of <em>Duncombe</em> and of <em>Legge</em>,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Cannon and powder, but in vain, to beg:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And <em>Upnor’s Castle’s ill-deserted wall</em>,</span>
							<br/>
							<span><em>Now needful does for ammunition call</em>,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>He finds, where’er he succour might expect,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Confusion, folly, treachery, fear, neglect.”</span>
						</p>
						<cite>
							<i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Instructions to a Painter</i>
						</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-90.xhtml#noteref-1564" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1565" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Meaning, apparently, that the Ordnance would deliver the charcoal, sulphur, and saltpetre separately, but not mix them as gunpowder. <a href="../text/chapter-90.xhtml#noteref-1565" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1566" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
						<p>
							<span>“Pride, Lust, Ambition, and the People’s Hate,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The kingdom’s broker, ruin of the State,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<em>Dunkirk’s sad loss, divider of the fleet,</em>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<em>Tangier’s compounder for a barren sheet:</em>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span>This shrub of gentry, married to the crown,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>His daughter to the heir, is tumbled down.”</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.boom">Poems on State Affairs</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 253</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-90.xhtml#noteref-1566" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1567" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Pett was made a scapegoat. This is confirmed by Marvel:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“After this loss, to relish discontent,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Some one must be accused by Parliament;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>All our miscarriages on Pett must fall,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>His name alone seems fit to answer all.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Whose counsel first did this mad war beget?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who all commands sold through the Navy? <em>Pett.</em></span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who would not follow when the Dutch were beat?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who treated out the time at Bergen? <em>Pett.</em></span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who the Dutch fleet with storms disabled met,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And, rifling prizes, them neglected? <em>Pett.</em></span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who with false news prevented the Gazette,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The fleet divided, writ for <em>Rupert</em>? <em>Pett.</em></span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who all our seamen cheated of their debt?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And all our prizes who did swallow? <em>Pett.</em></span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who did advise no navy out to set?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And who the forts left unprepared? <em>Pett.</em></span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who to supply with powder did forget</span>
							<br/>
							<span>
								<em>Languard, Sheerness, Gravesend, and Upnor? Pett.</em>
							</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who all our ships exposed in Chatham net?</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Who should it be but the fanatick <em>Pett</em>?</span>
							<br/>
							<span><em>Pett</em>, the sea-architect, in making ships,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Was the first cause of all these naval slips.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Had he not built, none of these faults had been;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>If no creation, there had been no sin</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But his great crime, one boat away he sent,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>That lost our fleet, and did our flight prevent.”</span>
						</p>
						<cite>
							<i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Instructions to a Painter</i>
						</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-90.xhtml#noteref-1567" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1568" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span> was at this time in Flanders, with his queen, his mistresses, and all his Court. Turenne commanded under him. Whilst Charles was hunting moths at Lady Castlemaine’s, and the English fleet was burning, Louis was carrying on the campaign with vigour. Armentieres was taken on the 28th May; Charleroi on the 2nd June, <abbr>St.</abbr> Winox on the 6th, Fumes on the 12th, Ath on the 16th, Toumay on the 24th; the Escarpe on the 6th July, Courtray on the 18th, Audenarde on the 31st; and Lisle on the 27th August.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-90.xhtml#noteref-1568" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1569" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Carterets appear to have mystified Pepys, who eagerly believed all that was told him. At this time Paris was notoriously unsafe, infested with robbers and beggars, and abominably unclean. Colbert had three daughters, of whom the eldest was just married when Pepys wrote, <abbr>viz.</abbr>, Jean Marie Therese, to the Duc de Chevreuse, on the 3rd February, 1667. The second daughter, Henriette Louise, was not married to the Duc de <abbr>St.</abbr> Aignan till January 21st, 1671; and the third, Marie Anne, to the Duc de Mortemart, February 14th, 1679. Colbert himself was never made a duke. His highest title was Marquis de Seignelay.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-90.xhtml#noteref-1569" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1570" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“The bottom of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Royal James</i> is got afloat, and those of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Loyal London</i> and <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Royal Oak</i> soon will be so. Many men are at work to put Sheerness in a posture of defence, and a boom is being fitted over the river by Upnor Castle, which with the good fortifications will leave nothing to fear.”</p>
						<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Calendar of State Papers</i>, 1667, <abbr>p.</abbr> 285</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-90.xhtml#noteref-1570" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1571" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Richard Browne, writing to Williamson from Aldeburgh, on July 2nd, says:</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“The Dutch fleet of 80 sail has anchored in the bay; they were expected to land, but they tacked about, and stood first northward and then southward, close by Orford lighthouse, and have now passed the Ness towards Harwich; they have fired no guns, but made false fires”</p>
						<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Calendar of State Papers</i>, 1667, <abbr>p.</abbr> 258</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-91.xhtml#noteref-1571" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1572" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>See May 9th, 1667. <a href="../text/chapter-91.xhtml#noteref-1572" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1573" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Lord Buckhurst and Nell Gwyn, with the help of Sir Charles Sedley, kept “merry house” at Epsom next door to the King’s Head Inn (see Cunningham’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Story of Nell Gwyn</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> 1892, <abbr>p.</abbr> 57) <a href="../text/chapter-91.xhtml#noteref-1573" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1574" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Of Clement <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>, Giulio Rispogliosi, elected June 20th, 1667, <abbr class="eoc">N.S.</abbr> He was succeeded by Clement <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span> in 1670. <a href="../text/chapter-91.xhtml#noteref-1574" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1575" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Thomas Pointer to Samuel Pepys (Hull, July 15th): “<abbr>Capt.</abbr> Hogg has brought in a great prize laden with Canary wine; also <abbr>Capt.</abbr> Reeves of the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Panther</i>, and the <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Fanfan</i>, whose commander is slain, have come in with their prizes” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Calendar of State Papers</i>, 1667, <abbr>p.</abbr> 298). <a href="../text/chapter-91.xhtml#noteref-1575" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1576" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The wife of Balthazar <abbr>St.</abbr> Michel, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Pepys’s brother.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-91.xhtml#noteref-1576" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1577" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Leigh, opposite to Sheerness.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-91.xhtml#noteref-1577" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1578" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Reference has already been made to Andrew Marvell’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Instructions to a Painter</i>, in which the unpaid English sailors are described as swimming to the Dutch ships, where they received the money which was withheld from them on their own ships. <a href="../text/chapter-91.xhtml#noteref-1578" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1579" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The angel coin was so called from the figure of the Archangel Michael in conflict with the dragon on the obverse. On the reverse was a representation of a ship with a large cross as a mast. The last angel coined was in Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>’s reign, and the value varied from 6<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> 8<abbr class="currency">d.</abbr> to 10<abbr class="currency eoc">s.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-91.xhtml#noteref-1579" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1580" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“<dfn>Bilander.</dfn> A small merchant vessel with two masts, particularly distinguished from other vessels with two masts by the form of her mainsail, which is bent to the whole length of her yard, hanging fore and aft, and inclined to the horizon at an angle of about 45º. Few vessels are now rigged in this manner, and the name is rather indiscriminately used.”</p>
						<cite>Smyth’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sailor’s Word-Book</i></cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-91.xhtml#noteref-1580" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1581" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Dull, heavy, spiritless. <a href="../text/chapter-91.xhtml#noteref-1581" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1582" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><dfn>Tamkin</dfn>, or tampion, the wooden stopper of a cannon placed in the muzzle to exclude water or dust. <a href="../text/chapter-91.xhtml#noteref-1582" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1583" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The peace was signed on the 31st. See August 9th.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-91.xhtml#noteref-1583" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1584" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Charles owned only four children by Lady Castlemaine-Anne, Countess of Sussex, and the Dukes of Southampton, Grafton, and Northumberland. The last of these was born in 1665. The paternity of all her other children was certainly doubtful. See <abbr>pp.</abbr> 50, 52. <a href="../text/chapter-91.xhtml#noteref-1584" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1585" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“<abbr>Sept.</abbr> 6, 1667. John Clarke to James Hickes. A vessel arrived from Harwich brings news that the English lost 600 to 700 men in the attempt on <abbr>St.</abbr> Christopher; that Sir John Harman was not then there, but going with 11 ships, and left a ketch at Barbadoes to bring more soldiers after him; that the ketch met a French sloop with a packet from <abbr>St.</abbr> Christopher to their fleet at Martinico, and took her, whereupon Sir John Harman sailed there and fell upon their fleet of 27 sail, 25 of which he sank, and burnt the others, save two which escaped; also that he left three of his fleet there, and went with the rest to Nevis, to make another attempt on <abbr>St.</abbr> Christopher.</p>
						<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Calendar of State Payers</i>, 1667, <abbr>p.</abbr> 447</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-92.xhtml#noteref-1585" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1586" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The collected edition of Denham’s poems is dated 1668. The verses referred to are inscribed “To Sir John Mennis being invited from Calice to Bologne to eat a pig,” and two of the lines run:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“Little Admiral John</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To Bologne is gone.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>This occurrence took place before the Restoration. <a href="../text/chapter-92.xhtml#noteref-1586" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1587" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A bleacher of linen. “The whitsters of Datchet Mead” are referred to by <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Ford (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Merry Wives of Windsor</i>, act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>, <abbr>sc.</abbr> 3). <a href="../text/chapter-92.xhtml#noteref-1587" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1588" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>See 10th of this month. <a href="../text/chapter-92.xhtml#noteref-1588" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1589" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Bide, brewer, Sheriff of London in 1647.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-92.xhtml#noteref-1589" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1590" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Betty Turner, who is frequently mentioned after this date, appears to have been a daughter of Serjeant John Turner and his wife Jane, and younger sister of Theophila Turner (see January 4th, 6th, 1668⁠–⁠69). <a href="../text/chapter-92.xhtml#noteref-1590" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1591" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The post of Master Falconer was afterwards granted to Charles’s son by Nell Gwyn, and it is still held by the Duke of <abbr>St.</abbr> Albans, as an hereditary office.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-92.xhtml#noteref-1591" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1592" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>So much of London was yet in ruins.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-92.xhtml#noteref-1592" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1593" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The “boot” was originally a projection on each side of the coach, where the passengers sat with their backs to the carriage. Such a “boot” is seen in the carriage containing the attendants of Queen Elizabeth, in Hoefnagel’s well-known picture of Nonsuch Palace, dated 1582. Taylor, the Water Poet, the inveterate opponent of the introduction of coaches, thus satirizes the one in which he was forced to take his place as a passenger: “It wears two boots and no spurs, sometimes having two pairs of legs in one boot; and oftentimes against nature most preposterously it makes fair ladies wear the boot. Moreover, it makes people imitate sea-crabs, in being drawn sideways, as they are when they sit in the boot of the coach.” In course of time these projections were abolished, and the coach then consisted of three parts, <abbr>viz.</abbr>, the body, the boot (on the top of which the coachman sat), and the baskets at the back. <a href="../text/chapter-92.xhtml#noteref-1593" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1594" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>See note on introduction of glass coaches, September 23rd, 1667. <a href="../text/chapter-92.xhtml#noteref-1594" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1595" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Charles Hart, great-nephew of Shakespeare, a favourite actor. He is credited with being Nell Gwyn’s first lover (or Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, as the wits put it), and with having brought her on the stage. He died of stone, and was buried at Stanmore Magna, Middlesex, where he had a country house. <a href="../text/chapter-92.xhtml#noteref-1595" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1596" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Lord Buckhurst’s liaison with Nell Gwyn probably came to an end about this time. We learn from Pepys that in January, 1667⁠–⁠68, the king sent several times for Nelly (see January 11th, 1667⁠–⁠68). Nell’s eldest son by Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, Charles Beauclerc, was not born till May 8th, 1670. He was created Earl of Burford in 1676 and Duke of <abbr>St.</abbr> Albans in 1684. <a href="../text/chapter-92.xhtml#noteref-1596" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1597" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Clarendon refers to this scene in the continuation of his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life</i> (<abbr>ed.</abbr> 1827, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 291), and Lister writes: “Lady Castlemaine rose hastily from her noontide bed, and came out into her aviary, anxious to read in the saddened air of her distinguished enemy some presage of his fall” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of Clarendon</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 412). <a href="../text/chapter-92.xhtml#noteref-1597" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1598" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The well-known story, first told by Boccaccio, then by Petrarca, afterwards by Chaucer, and which has since become proverbial. Tom Warton, writing about 1770, says, “I need not mention that it is to this day represented in England, on a stage of the lowest species, and of the highest antiquity: I mean at a puppet show” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>Hist.</abbr> of English Poetry</i>, <abbr>sect.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xv</span>).⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-92.xhtml#noteref-1598" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1599" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Lord Rochester wrote:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“His very dog at council board</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Sits grave and wise as any lord.”</span>
						</p>
						<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Poems</i>, 1697, <abbr>p.</abbr> 150</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>The king’s dogs were constantly stolen from him, and he advertised for their return. Some of these amusing advertisements are printed in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Notes and Queries</i> (seventh series, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 26). <a href="../text/chapter-93.xhtml#noteref-1599" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1600" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Winchcombe <abbr>St.</abbr> Peter, a market-town in Gloucestershire. Tobacco was first cultivated in this parish, after its introduction into England, in 1583, and it proved, a considerable source of profit to the inhabitants, till the trade was placed under restrictions. The cultivation was first prohibited during the Commonwealth, and various acts were passed in the reign of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> for the same purpose. Among the king’s pamphlets in the British Museum is a tract entitled <i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">Harry Hangman’s Honour, or Glostershire Hangman’s Request to the Smokers and Tobacconists of London</i>, dated June 11th, 1655. The author writes: “The very planting of tobacco hath proved the decay of my trade, for since it hath been planted in Glostershire, especially at Winchcomb, my trade hath proved nothing worth.” He adds: “Then ’twas a merry world with me, for indeed before tobacco was there planted, there being no kind of trade to employ men, and very small tillage, necessity compelled poor men to stand my friends by stealing of sheep and other cattel, breaking of hedges, robbing of orchards, and whatnot.” <a href="../text/chapter-93.xhtml#noteref-1600" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1601" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This remarkable fact is confirmed by Evelyn, in a letter to Sir Samuel Tuke, September 27th, 1666. See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Correspondence</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 345, <abbr>edit.</abbr> 1879. <a href="../text/chapter-93.xhtml#noteref-1601" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1602" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Napier or Neper (1550⁠–⁠1617), laird of Merchiston (now swallowed up in the enlarged Edinburgh of today, although the old castle still stands), and the inventor of logarithms. He published his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper" xml:lang="la">Rabdologiæ seu numerationis per virgulas libri duo</i> in 1617, and the work was reprinted and translated into Italian (1623) and Dutch (1626). In 1667 William Leybourn published <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Art of Numbering by Speaking Rods, vulgarly termed Napier’s Bones</i>. <a href="../text/chapter-93.xhtml#noteref-1602" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1603" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Knight, a celebrated singer and mistress of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. There is in Waller’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Poems</i> a song sung by her to the queen on her birthday. In her portrait, engraved by Faber, after Kneller, she is represented in mourning, and in a devout posture before a crucifix. Evelyn refers to her singing as incomparable, and adds that she had “the greatest reach of any English woman; she had been lately roaming in Italy, and was much improv’d in that quality” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diary</i>, December 2nd, 1674). <a href="../text/chapter-93.xhtml#noteref-1603" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1604" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Elizabeth Aynsworth, here mentioned, was a noted procurerss at Cambridge, banished from that town by the university authorities for her evil courses. She subsequently kept the Rein Deer Inn at Bishops Stortford, at which the Vice-Chancellor, and some of the heads of colleges, had occasion to sleep, in their way to London, and were nobly entertained, their supper being served off plate. The next morning their hostess refused to make any charge, saying, that she was still indebted to the Vice-Chancellor, who, by driving her out of Cambridge, had made her fortune. No tradition of this woman has been preserved at Bishops Stortford; but it appears, from the register of that parish, that she was buried there 26th of March, 1686. It is recorded in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Essex</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>, (<abbr>p.</abbr> 130) <abbr>8vo.</abbr>, 1770, and in a pamphlet in the British Museum, entitled, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">Boteler’s Case</i>, that she was implicated in the murder of Captain Wood, a Hertfordshire gentleman, at Manuden, in Essex, and for which offence a person named Boteler was executed at Chelmsford, September 10th, 1667, and that <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Aynsworth, tried at the same time as an accessory before the fact, was acquitted for want of evidence; though in her way to the jail she endeavoured to throw herself into the river, but was prevented. See Postea, May 25th, 1668.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-94.xhtml#noteref-1604" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1605" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>Mr.</abbr> George <abbr class="name">T.</abbr> Robinson, <abbr>F.S.A.</abbr>, in a paper on <i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">Decorative Plaster Work</i>, read before the Society of Arts in April, 1891, refers to the ceilings at Audley End as presenting an excellent idea of the state of the stuccoer’s art in the middle of James <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>’s reign, and adds, “Few houses in England can show so fine a series of the same date … The great hall has medallions in the square portions of the ceiling formed by its dividing timber beams. The large saloon on the principal floor-a room about 66 feet long by 30 feet wide-has a very remarkable ceiling of the pendentive type, which presents many peculiarities, the most notable of which, that these not only depend from the ceiling, but the outside ones spring from the walls in a natural and structural manner. This is a most unusual circumstance in the stucco work of the time, the reason for the omission of this reasonable treatment evidently being the unwillingness of the stuccoer to omit his elaborate frieze in which he took such delight” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Journal <abbr>Soc.</abbr> of Arts</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxix</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 449) <a href="../text/chapter-94.xhtml#noteref-1605" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1606" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>About the year 1842, in removing the foundation of an old wall, adjoining a mansion at Brampton, always considered the quondam residence of the Pepys family, an iron pot, full of silver coins, was discovered, and taken to the Earl of Sandwich, the owner of the house, in whose possession they still remain. The pot was so much corroded, that a small piece of it only could be preserved. The coins were chiefly half-crowns of Elizabeth and the two elder Stuarts, and all of a date anterior to the Restoration. Although Pepys states that the treasure which he caused to be buried was gold exclusively, it is very probable that, in the confusion, a pot full of silver money was packed up with the rest; but, at all events, the coincidence appeared too singular to pass over without notice.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-94.xhtml#noteref-1606" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1607" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This question of the division of the fleet in May, 1666, was one over which endless controversy as to responsibility was raised. When Prince Rupert, with twenty ships, was detached to prevent the junction of the French squadron with the Dutch, the Duke of Albemarle was left with fifty-four ships against eighty belonging to the Dutch. Albemarle’s tactics are praised by Captain Mahan. <a href="../text/chapter-94.xhtml#noteref-1607" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1608" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The trumpet marine is a stringed instrument having a triangular-shaped body or chest and a long neck, a single string raised on a bridge and running along the body and neck. It was played with a bow. <a href="../text/chapter-94.xhtml#noteref-1608" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1609" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Edward Backwell, goldsmith and alderman of the City of London. He was a man of considerable wealth during the Commonwealth. After the Restoration he negotiated Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>’s principal money transactions. He was <abbr>M.P.</abbr> for Wendover in the parliament of 1679, and in the Oxford parliament of 1680. According to the writer of the life in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>Dict.</abbr> of <abbr>Nat. Biog.</abbr></i> his heirs did not ultimately suffer any pecuniary loss by the closure of the Exchequer. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Hilton Price stated that Backwell removed to Holland in 1676, and died therein 1679; but this is disproved by the pedigree in Lipscomb’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>Hist.</abbr> of Bucks</i>, where the date of his death is given as 1683, as well as by the fact that he sat for Wendover in 1679 and 1680, as stated above. <a href="../text/chapter-95.xhtml#noteref-1609" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1610" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The term <dfn>Cabinet Council</dfn>, as stated by Clarendon, originated thus, in 1640: “The bulk and burden of the state affairs lay principally upon the shoulders of the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Earl of Strafford, and the Lord Cottington; some others being joined to them, as the Earl of Northumberland for ornament, the Bishop of London for his place, the two Secretaries, Sir <abbr class="name">H.</abbr> Vane and Sir Francis Windebank, for service and communication of intelligence: only the Marquis of Hamilton, indeed, by his skill and interest, bore as great a part as he had a mind to do, and had the skill to meddle no further than he had a mind. These persons made up the committee of state, which was reproachfully after called the junto, and enviously then in the Court <em>the Cabinet Council</em>” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of the Rebellion</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 211, <abbr>edit.</abbr> 1849). <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Murray (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">New English Dictionary</i>) says that the expression “he is of the cabinet” is used of Vane by Roe, 1630. See ante, November 9th, 1664 (<abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 285), and August 26th, 1666 (<abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 411), where Pepys refers to the “Cabinet.” <a href="../text/chapter-95.xhtml#noteref-1610" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1611" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Laurence Hyde, second son of Lord Chancellor Clarendon (1614⁠–⁠1711). He held many important offices, and was First Lord of the Treasury, 1679⁠–⁠84; created Earl of Rochester in 1681, and <abbr>K.G.</abbr> 1685. <a href="../text/chapter-95.xhtml#noteref-1611" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1612" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This was Arthur Coga, who had studied at Cambridge, and was said to be a bachelor of divinity. He was indigent, and “looked upon as a very freakish and extravagant man.” <abbr>Dr.</abbr> King, in a letter to the <abbr>Hon.</abbr> Robert Boyle, remarks “that <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Coga was about thirty-two years of age; that he spoke Latin well, when he was in company, which he liked, but that his brain was sometimes a little too warm.” The experiment was performed on November 23rd, 1667, by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> King, at Arundel House, in the presence of many spectators of quality, and four or five physicians. Coga wrote a description of his own case in Latin, and when asked why he had not the blood of some other creature, instead of that of a sheep, transfused into him, answered, “<i xml:lang="la">Sanguis ovis symbolicam quandam facultatem habet cum sanguine Christi, quia Christus est agnus Dei</i>” (Birch’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of the Royal Society</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 214⁠–⁠16). Coga was the first person in England to be experimented upon; previous experiments were made by the transfusion of the blood of one dog into another. See November 14th, 1666. <a href="../text/chapter-95.xhtml#noteref-1612" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1613" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A male cat. “Gib” is a contraction of the Christian name Gilbert (Old French), “Tibert.”</p>
					<blockquote>
						<p>“I am melancholy as a gib-cat.”</p>
						<cite>Shakespeare, 1 <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Henry <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span></i>, act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>sc.</abbr> 3</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Gib alone is also used, and a verb made from it⁠—“to gib,” or act like a cat. <a href="../text/chapter-95.xhtml#noteref-1613" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1614" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This character of Archbishop Sheldon does not tally with the scandal that Pepys previously reported of him. Burnet has some passages of importance on this in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Own Time</i>, Book <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. He affirms that Charles’s final decision to throw over Clarendon was caused by the Chancellor’s favouring <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Stewart’s marriage with the Duke of Richmond. The king had a conference with Sheldon on the removal of Clarendon, but could not convert the archbishop to his view. Lauderdale told Burnet that he had an account of the interview from the king. “The king and Sheldon had gone into such expostulations upon it that from that day forward Sheldon could never recover the king’s confidence.” <a href="../text/chapter-96.xhtml#noteref-1614" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1615" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The practice of gallants attending the theatre without payment is illustrated by <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Lowe in his “Betterton,” from Shadwell’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">True Widow</i>:</p>
					<blockquote>
						<table epub:type="z3998:drama">
							<tr>
								<td epub:type="z3998:persona">1st Doorkeeper</td>
								<td>Pray, sir, pay me: my masters will make me pay it.</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td epub:type="z3998:persona">3rd Man</td>
								<td>Impudent rascal, do you ask me for money? Take that, sirrah.</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td epub:type="z3998:persona">2nd Doorkeeper</td>
								<td>Will you pay me, sir?</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td epub:type="z3998:persona">4th Man</td>
								<td>No; I don’t intend to stay.</td>
							</tr>
							<tr>
								<td epub:type="z3998:persona">2nd Doorkeeper</td>
								<td>So you say every day, and see two or three acts for nothing.</td>
							</tr>
						</table>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-96.xhtml#noteref-1615" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1616" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“An Act for taking the Accompts of the several sums of money therein men͠coned, 19 and 20 <abbr>Car.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, <abbr>c.</abbr> 1. The commissioners were empowered to call before them all Treasurers, Receivers, Paymasters, Principal Officers and Commissioners of the Navy and Ordnance respectively, Pursers, Mustermasters and Clerks of the Cheque, Accomptants, and all Officers and Keepers of his Majesties Stores and Provisions for Warr as well for Land as Sea, and all other persons whatsoever imployed in the management of the said Warr or requisite for the discovery of any frauds relating thereunto,” <abbr>etc.</abbr>, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr></p>
						<cite><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Statutes of the Realm</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 624⁠–⁠627</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-96.xhtml#noteref-1616" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1617" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>George Fournier, a Jesuit, born at Caen in 1569, was the author of several nautical works. His chief one, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">L’Hydrographie</i>, was published at Paris in folio in 1663. A second edition appeared in 1667. <a href="../text/chapter-97.xhtml#noteref-1617" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1618" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">L’Escole des Filles</i>, by Helot, was burnt at the foot of the gallows in 1672, and the author himself was burnt in effigy. <a href="../text/chapter-97.xhtml#noteref-1618" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1619" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Richard Gibson, so frequently noticed by Pepys, was a clerk in the Navy Office. His collection of papers relating to the navy of England <abbr class="era">A.D.</abbr> 1650⁠–⁠1702, compiled, as he states, from the Admiralty books in the Navy Office, are in the British Museum.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-97.xhtml#noteref-1619" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1620" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Anna Maria, daughter of Robert Brudenel, second Earl of Cardigan. Walpole says she held the Duke of Buckingham’s horse, in the habit of a page, while he was fighting the duel with her husband. She married, secondly, George Rodney Bridges, son of Sir Thomas Bridges of Keynsham, Somerset, Groom of the Bedchamber to Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, and died April 20th, 1702. A portrait of the Countess of Shrewsbury, as Minerva, by Lely. <a href="../text/chapter-97.xhtml#noteref-1620" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1621" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Marguerite de Valois, Queen of Navarre, sister of Francis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> of France. The “pretty story” was doubtless from her <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Heptaméron</i>, a work imitating in title and matter the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Decameron</i> of Boccaccio. She is said to be the heroine of some of the adventures. It is fair to add that she wrote also the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Miroir d’une Ame Pecheresse</i>, translated into English by Queen Elizabeth, the title of whose book was <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A Godly Medytacyon of the Christian Soules</i>, published by John Bale in 1548.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-97.xhtml#noteref-1621" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1622" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This was not the only time that Pepys took trouble to save the estate of a friend who had committed suicide. In the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Caveat Book</i> in the Record Office, <abbr>p.</abbr> 42 of the volume for 1677, is the following entry: “That no grant pass of the Estate of Francis Gurney of Maldon in Essex, who drowned himself in his own well on Tuesday night y<sup>e</sup> 12th of this instant August, at the desire of Samuel Pepys, Esquire, August 20, 1677.” <a href="../text/chapter-97.xhtml#noteref-1622" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1623" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A term for making a noise or disturbance. <a href="../text/chapter-97.xhtml#noteref-1623" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1624" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>William Godolphin, descended from a younger branch of that family, which was afterwards ennobled in the person of Sidney, Earl Godolphin, Lord Treasurer. William Godolphin was of Christ Church, Oxford, and graduated <abbr>M.A.</abbr>, January 14th, 1660⁠–⁠61. He was afterwards secretary to Sir <abbr class="name">H.</abbr> Bennet (Lord Arlington), and <abbr>M.P.</abbr> for Camelford. He was a great favourite at Court, and was knighted on August 28th, 1668. In the spring of 1669 he returned to Spain as Envoy Extraordinary, and in 1671 he became Ambassador. On July 11th, 1696, he died at Madrid, having been for some years a Roman Catholic. <a href="../text/chapter-97.xhtml#noteref-1624" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1625" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The royal pardon was thus announced in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Gazette</i> of February 24th, 1668: “This day his Majesty was pleased to declare at the Board, that whereas, in contemplation of the eminent services heretofore done to his Majesty by most of the persons who were engaged in the late duel, or rencontre, wherein William Jenkins was killed, he doth graciously pardon the said offence: nevertheless, He is resolved from henceforth that on no pretence whatsoever any pardon shall be hereafter granted to any person whatsoever for killing of any man, in any duel or rencontre, but that the course of law shall wholly take place in all such cases.” The warrant for a pardon to George, Duke of Buckingham, is dated January 27th, 1668; and on the following day was issued, “Warrant for a grant to Francis, Earl of Shrewsbury, of pardon for killing William Jenkins, and for all duels, assaults, or batteries on George, Duke of Buckingham, Sir John Talbot, Sir Robert Holmes, or any other, whether indicted or not for the same, with restitution of lands, goods, <abbr>etc.</abbr>” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Calendar of State Papers</i>, 1667⁠–⁠68, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 192, 193). <a href="../text/chapter-98.xhtml#noteref-1625" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1626" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Francis Pemberton, afterwards knighted, and made Lord Chief Justice of the King’s Bench in 1679. His career was a most singular one, he having been twice removed from the Bench, and twice imprisoned by the House of Commons. He twice returned to the bar, and after his second return he practised with great success as a serjeant for the next fourteen years till his death, June 10th, 1697. Evelyn says, “He was held to be the most learned of the judges and an honest man” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diary</i>, October 4th, 1683). <a href="../text/chapter-98.xhtml#noteref-1626" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1627" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Lord Chamberlain’s Records contain a copy of a warrant dated July 12th, 1661, “to deliver to <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Killegrew thirty yards of velvett, three dozen of fringe, and sixteene yards of Damaske for the year 1661.” The heading of this entry is “Livery for y<sup>e</sup> jester” (Lowe’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Betterton</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 70). <a href="../text/chapter-98.xhtml#noteref-1627" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1628" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Secret service money. <a href="../text/chapter-98.xhtml#noteref-1628" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1629" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir William Coventry’s love of money is said by Sir John Denham to have influenced him in promoting naval officers, who paid him for their commissions.</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“Then Painter! draw cerulian Coventry,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Keeper, or rather Chancellor o’ th’ sea;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And more exactly to express his hue,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Use nothing but <em>ultra-marinish</em> blue.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>To pay his fees, the silver trumpet spends,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>And boatswain’s whistle for his place depends.</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Pilots in vain repeat their compass o’er,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Until of him they learn that one point more:</span>
							<br/>
							<span>The constant magnet to the pole doth hold,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Steel to the magnet, <em>Coventry</em> to gold.</span>
							<br/>
							<span><em>Muscovy</em> sells us pitch, and hemp, and tar;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Iron and copper, <em>Sweden</em>; Munster, war;</span>
							<br/>
							<span><em>Ashley</em>, prize; <em>Warwick</em>, custom; <em>Cart’ret</em>, pay;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But <em>Coventry</em> doth sell the fleet away.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-98.xhtml#noteref-1629" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1630" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The turquoise. This stone was sometimes referred to simply as the turkey, and Broderip (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Zoological Recreations</i>) conjectured that the bird (turkey) took its name from the blue or turquoise colour of the skin about its head. <a href="../text/chapter-98.xhtml#noteref-1630" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1631" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Pepys here refers to the extraordinary proceedings which occurred between Charles, Lord Gerard, and Alexander Fitton, of which a narrative was published at the Hague in 1665. Granger was a witness in the cause, and was afterwards said to be conscience-stricken from his perjury. Some notice of this case will be found in North’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Examen</i>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 558; but the copious and interesting note in Ormerod’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Cheshire</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 291, will best satisfy the reader, who will not fail to be struck by the paragraph with which it is closed-<abbr>viz.</abbr>, “It is not improbable that Alexander Fitton, who, in the first instance, gained rightful possession of Gawsworth under an acknowledged settlement, was driven headlong into unpremeditated guilt by the production of a revocation by will which Lord Gerard had so long concealed. Having lost his own fortune in the prosecution of his claims, he remained in gaol till taken out by James <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> to be made Chancellor of Ireland (under which character Hume first notices him), was knighted, and subsequently created Lord Gawsworth after the abdication of James, sat in his parliament in Dublin in 1689, and then is supposed to have accompanied his fallen master to France. Whether the conduct of Fitton was met, as he alleges, by similar guilt on the part of Lord Gerard, God only can judge; but his hand fell heavily on the representatives of that noble house. In less than half a century the husbands of its two co-heiresses, James, Duke of Hamilton, and Charles, Lord Mohun, were slain by each other’s hands in a murderous duel arising out of a dispute relative to the partition of the Fitton estates, and Gawsworth itself passed to an unlineal hand, by a series of alienations complicated beyond example in the annals of this country.”⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-98.xhtml#noteref-1631" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1632" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A scholar appointed to make a satirical and jesting speech at an Act in the University of Oxford. <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Christopher Wordsworth gives, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Social Life at the English Universities in the Eighteenth Century</i>, 1874, a list of <i xml:lang="la">terræ-filii</i> from 1591 to 1713 (<abbr>pp.</abbr> 296⁠–⁠298, 680). The <i xml:lang="la">terræ filius</i> was sometimes expelled the university on account of the licence of his speech. The practice was discontinued early in the eighteenth century. <a href="../text/chapter-98.xhtml#noteref-1632" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1633" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Theatre company of young actors in training. <a href="../text/chapter-98.xhtml#noteref-1633" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1634" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The goldsmith. <a href="../text/chapter-98.xhtml#noteref-1634" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1635" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The King. <a href="../text/chapter-99.xhtml#noteref-1635" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1636" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>At the meeting of the Royal Society on March 12th, 1668, “<abbr>Mr.</abbr> Smethwick’s glasses were tried again; and his telescope being compared with another longer telescope, and the object-glasses exchanged, was still found to exceed the other in goodness; and his burning concave being compared with a spherical burning-glass of almost twice the diameter, and held to the fire, it burnt gloves, whereas the other spherical ones would not burn at all.”⁠—“Sir Robert Southwell being lately returned from Portugal, where he had been ambassador from the king, and being desired to acquaint the society with what he had done with respect to the instructions, which he had received from them before his departure from England, related, that he had lodged the astronomical quadrant, which the society had sent to Portugal to make observations with there, with a body of men at Lisbon, who had applied themselves among other kinds of literature to mathematics” (Birch’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of the Royal Society</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 256). <a href="../text/chapter-99.xhtml#noteref-1636" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1637" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A pewter cistern was formerly part of the furniture of a well-appointed dining-room; the plates were rinsed in it, when necessary, during the meal. A magnificent silver cistern is still preserved in the dining-room at Burghley House, the seat of the Marquis of Exeter. It is said to be the largest piece of plate in England, and was once the subject of a curious wager.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-99.xhtml#noteref-1637" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1638" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The same as Morland’s so-called calculating machine. Sir Samuel published in 1673 <i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">The Description and Use of two Arithmetick Instruments, together with a short Treatise of Arithmetic, as likewise a Perpetual Almanack and severall useful tables</i>. <a href="../text/chapter-99.xhtml#noteref-1638" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1639" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This must have been Florio’s translation, as Cotton’s was not published until 1685. <a href="../text/chapter-99.xhtml#noteref-1639" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1640" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Life of the thrice noble, high, and puissant Prince, William Cavendish, Duke … of Newcastle</i>, by his duchess, of which the first edition, in folio, was published in 1667. <a href="../text/chapter-99.xhtml#noteref-1640" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1641" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>William Acworth, storekeeper at Woolwich, was accused of converting stores to his own use (see <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Calendar of State Papers</i>, 1667⁠–⁠68, <abbr>p.</abbr> 279). <a href="../text/chapter-99.xhtml#noteref-1641" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1642" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>It was customary for the apprentices of the metropolis to avail themselves of their holidays, especially on Shrove Tuesday, to search after women of ill fame, and to confine them during the season of Lent. See a <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Satyre against Separatists</i>, 1642.</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“Stand forth, Shrove Tuesday, one a’ the silenc’st bricklayers;</span>
							<br/>
							<span>’Tis in your charge to pull down bawdyhouses.”</span>
						</p>
						<cite>Middleton’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Inner Temple Masque</i>, 1619, Works, <abbr>ed.</abbr> Bullen, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vii</span>, 209</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-99.xhtml#noteref-1642" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1643" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A box to hold bottles. “Run for the cellar of strong waters quickly”⁠—Ben Jonson, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Magnetic Lady</i>, act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>, <abbr>sc.</abbr> 1. <a href="../text/chapter-100.xhtml#noteref-1643" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1644" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Ear trumpet. <a href="../text/chapter-100.xhtml#noteref-1644" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1645" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Four were executed on May 9th, namely, Thomas Limmerick, Edward Cotton, Peter Massenger, and Richard Beasley. They were drawn, hanged, and quartered at Tyburn, and two of their heads fixed upon London Bridge (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">The London Gazette</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 259). See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Tryals of such persons as under the notion of London Apprentices were tumultuously assembled in Moore Fields, under colour of pulling down bawdyhouses</i>, <abbr>4to.</abbr>, London, 1668. “It is to be observed,” says <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">The London Gazette</i>, “to the just vindication of the City, that none of the persons apprehended upon the said tumult were found to be apprentices, as was given out, but some idle persons, many of them nursed in the late Rebellion, too readily embracing any opportunity of making their own advantages to the disturbance of the peace, and injury of others.” <a href="../text/chapter-100.xhtml#noteref-1645" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1646" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>“The Poor Whores’ Petition to the most splendid, illustrious, serene and eminent Lady of Pleasure the Countess of Castlemayne, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, signed by us, Madam Cresswell and Damaris Page, this present 25th day of March, 1668.” This sham petition occasioned a pretended answer, entitled, “The Gracious Answer of the Most Illustrious Lady of Pleasure, the Countess of Castlem … to the Poor Whores’ Petition.” It is signed, “Given at our Closset, in King Street, Westminster, die Veneris, April 24, 1668. Castlem. …” Compare Evelyn, April 2nd, 1668. <a href="../text/chapter-100.xhtml#noteref-1646" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1647" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The entries from April 10th to April 19th are transcribed from three leaves (six pages) of rough notes, which are inserted in the <abbr class="eoc">MS.</abbr> The rough notes were made to serve for a sort of account book, but the amounts paid are often not registered in the fair copy when he came to transcribe his notes into the Diary. <a href="../text/chapter-100.xhtml#noteref-1647" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1648" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Folly was a floating house of entertainment on the Thames, which at this time was a fashionable resort. <a href="../text/chapter-100.xhtml#noteref-1648" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1649" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The story alluded to by Pepys, which belongs not to the reign of Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, but to that of Edward <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>, occurred during a seditious outbreak at Bodmin, in Cornwall, and is thus related by Holinshed: “At the same time, and neare the same place [Bodmin], dwelled a miller, that had beene a greate dooer in that rebellion, for whom also Sir Anthonie Kingston sought: but the miller being thereof warned, called a good tall fellow that he had to his servant, and said unto him, ‘I have business to go from home; if anie therefore come to ask for me, saie thou art the owner of the mill, and the man for whom they shall so aske, and that thou hast kept this mill for the space of three yeares; but in no wise name me.’ The servant promised his maister so to doo. And shortlie after, came Sir Anthonie Kingston to the miller’s house, and calling for the miller, the servant came forth, and answered that he was the miller. ‘How long,’ quoth Sir Anthonie, ‘hast thou kept this mill?’ He answered, ‘Three years.’⁠—‘Well, then,’ said he, ‘come on: thou must go with me;’ and caused his men to laie hands on him, and to bring him to the next tree, saieing to him, ‘Thou hast been a busie knave, and therefore here shalt thou hang.’ Then cried the fellow out, and saide that he was not the miller, but the miller’s man. ‘Well, then,’ said Sir Anthonie, ‘thou art a false knave to be in two tales: therefore,’ said he, ‘hang him up;’ and so incontinentlie hanged he was indeed. After he was dead, one that was present told Sir Anthonie, ‘Surelie, sir, this was but the miller’s man.’⁠—‘What then!’ said he, ‘could he ever have done his maister better service than to hang for him?’ ”⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-100.xhtml#noteref-1649" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1650" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The first part of the entry for April 20th is among the rough notes, and stands as follows: “Monday 20. Up and busy about answer to Committee of Accounts this morning about several questions which vexed me though in none I have reason to be troubled. But the business of The Flying Greyhound begins to find me some care, though in that I am wholly void of blame.” This may be compared with the text. <a href="../text/chapter-100.xhtml#noteref-1650" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1651" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>From sitting as a member pending the impeachment.-<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-100.xhtml#noteref-1651" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1652" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sir Charles Berkeley, <abbr>jun.</abbr> was chosen in his room. In the sea-fight off Southwold Bay on June 3rd, 1665, the English triumphed over the Dutch, but the very considerable victory was not followed up. During the night, while the Duke of York slept, Henry Brouncker, his groom of the bedchamber, ordered the lieutenant to shorten sail, by which means the progress of the whole fleet was retarded, the Duke of York’s being the leading ship. The duke affirmed that he first heard of Brouncker’s unjustifiable action in July, and yet he kept the culprit in his service for nearly two years after the offence had come to his knowledge. After Brouncker had been dismissed from the duke’s service, the House of Commons ejected him. The whole matter is one of the unsolved difficulties of history. See Lister’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of Clarendon</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, 334, 335. <a href="../text/chapter-100.xhtml#noteref-1652" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1653" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Nicholas Fouquet, <i xml:lang="fr">Surintendant des Finances</i> in France, had built at Vaux a house which surpassed in magnificence any palace belonging to Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span>, prior to the erection of Versailles, and caused much envy to all the Court, especially to Colbert. <span xml:lang="fr">“On voyait partout dans cette maison les armes at la devise de Fouquet; c’est un ecureuil, avec ces paroles, <i xml:lang="la">Quò non ascendant</i>? ‘Où ne monterai-je point?’ Le Roi se les fit expliquer. L’ambition de cette devise ne servit pas à apaiser le monarque. Les courtisans remarquèrent que l’ecureuil était peint partout poursuivi par un couleuvre, qui était les armes de Colbert!”</span> Fouquet died at Pignerol in 1680, after nineteen years’ incarceration; and whilst Pepys was buying his books in London, Colbert had become prime minister in France, and Colbert’s brother ambassador in England. The <em>viper</em> had caught the <em>squirrel</em>!⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-100.xhtml#noteref-1653" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1654" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“Whilst Positive walks, like Woodcock in the park,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Contriving projects with a brewer’s clerk.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Andrew Marvell’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Instructions to a Painter</i>, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>, to which is subjoined the following note: “Sir Robert Howard, and Sir William Bucknell, the brewer.”⁠—<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Works</i>, <abbr>ed.</abbr> by <abbr>Capt.</abbr> <abbr class="name">E.</abbr> Thompson, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 405.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-101.xhtml#noteref-1654" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1655" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Impertinents</i>. <a href="../text/chapter-101.xhtml#noteref-1655" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1656" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This “odd case” was that of Thomas Skinner and the East India Company. According to Ralph, the Commons had ordered Skinner, the plaintiff, into the custody of the Serjeant-at-Arms, and the Lords did the same by Sir Samuel Barnadiston, deputy-governor of the company, as likewise Sir Andrew Rickard, <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Rowland Gwynn, and <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Christopher Boone.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-101.xhtml#noteref-1656" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1657" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Lady Sandwich. <a href="../text/chapter-101.xhtml#noteref-1657" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1658" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Loriners, or Lorimers (bit-makers), of London are by reputation an ancient mistery, but they were first incorporated by letters patent of 10 Queen Anne (December 3rd, 1711). Their small hall was at the corner of Basinghall Street in London Wall. The company has no hall now. <a href="../text/chapter-101.xhtml#noteref-1658" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1659" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>On the site of the present Buckingham Palace and gardens. Originally a garden of mulberry trees, planted by James <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> in 1609 with the intention of cultivating the manufacture of English silks. <a href="../text/chapter-101.xhtml#noteref-1659" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1660" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The meditations on death, and prayers used by Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span> shortly before his execution. <a href="../text/chapter-101.xhtml#noteref-1660" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1661" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Evidently adopted as a cant expression. The woman here alluded to was a procuress well known in her day, and described in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Tatler</i> (<abbr>No.</abbr> 84) as “the celebrated Madam Bennet.” We further learn, from the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Spectator</i> (<abbr>No.</abbr> 266), that she was the Lady <abbr class="name">B.</abbr> to whom Wycherley addressed his ironical dedication of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Plain Dealer</i>, which is considered as a masterpiece of raillery. It is worthy of remark that the fair sex may justly complain of almost every word in the English language designating a woman having, at some time or another, been used as a term of reproach; for we find Mother, Madam, Mistress, and Miss, all denoting women of bad character; and here Pepys adds the title of my Lady to the number, and completes the ungracious catalogue.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-101.xhtml#noteref-1661" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1662" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The rough notes for the journal from this time to the 17th of June are contained on five leaves, inserted in the book; and after them follow several pages left blank for the fair copy which was never made. <a href="../text/chapter-102.xhtml#noteref-1662" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1663" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This must have been either Inigo Jones’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The most notable Antiquity of Great Britain vulgarly called Stonehenge</i>, printed in 1655, or <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><i xml:lang="la">Chorea Gigantum</i>, or the most famous Antiquity of Great Britain, vulgarly called Stones Heng, standing on Salisbury Plain, restor’d to the Danes</i>, by Walter Charleton, <abbr>M.D.</abbr>, and published in 1663. <a href="../text/chapter-102.xhtml#noteref-1663" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1664" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Christ’s Hospital. <a href="../text/chapter-102.xhtml#noteref-1664" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1665" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Montacutes, from whom Lord Sandwich’s family claimed descent.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-102.xhtml#noteref-1665" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1666" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>They were natives of that county.-<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-102.xhtml#noteref-1666" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1667" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>“They draw all their heavy goods here on sleds, or sledges, which they call ‘gee hoes,’ without wheels, which kills a multitude of horses.” Another writer says, “They suffer no carts to be used in the city, lest, as some say, the shake occasioned by them on the pavement should affect the <em>Bristol milk</em> (the sherry) in the vaults, which is certainly had here in the greatest perfection.” An order of Common Council occurs in 1651 to prohibit the use of carts and wagons-only suffering drays. “Camden in giving our city credit for its cleanliness in forming ‘goutes,’ says they use sledges here instead of carts, lest they destroy the arches beneath which are the goutes.”⁠—Chilcott’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">New Guide to Bristol</i>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, 1826.-<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-102.xhtml#noteref-1667" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1668" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A sort of rum punch (milk punch), which, and turtle, were products of the trade of Bristol with the West Indies. So Byron says in the first edition of his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">English Bards and Scotch Reviewers</i>:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“Too much in turtle Bristol’s sons delight,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Too much o’er bowls of rack prolong the night.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>These lines will not be found in the modern editions; but the following are substituted:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“Four turtle feeder’s verse must needs he flat,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Though Bristol bloat him with the verdant fat.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>Lord Macaulay says of the collations with which the sugar-refiners of Bristol regaled their visitors: “The repast was dressed in the furnace, And was accompanied by a rich brewage made of the best Spanish wine, and celebrated over the whole kingdom as <em>Bristol milk</em>” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book"><abbr>Hist.</abbr> of England</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 335)⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-102.xhtml#noteref-1668" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1669" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>James Montagu, Bishop of Bath and Wells in 1608, and of Winchester in 1616⁠—died 1618. He was uncle to the Earl of Sandwich, whose mother was Pepys’s aunt. Hence Pepys’s curiosity respecting the tomb.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-102.xhtml#noteref-1669" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1670" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The rough notes end here. <a href="../text/chapter-102.xhtml#noteref-1670" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1671" epub:type="rearnote">
					<blockquote>
						<p>“Such an operation was performed in this year, after a consultation of medical men, and chiefly by Locke’s advice, and the wound was afterwards always kept open, a silver pipe being inserted. This saved Lord Ashley’s life, and gave him health”</p>
						<cite>Christie’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Life of the first Earl of Shaftesbury</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 34</cite>
					</blockquote>
					<p><em>Tapski</em> was a name given to Shaftesbury in derision, and vile defamers described the abscess, which had originated in a carriage accident in Holland, as the result of extreme dissipation. Lines by Duke, a friend and imitator of Dryden:</p>
					<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
						<p>
							<span>“The working ferment of his active mind,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>In his weak body’s cask with pain confined,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>Would burst the rotten vessel where ’tis pent,</span>
							<br/>
							<span>But that ’tis tapt to give the treason vent.”</span>
						</p>
					</blockquote>
					<p>
						<a href="../text/chapter-102.xhtml#noteref-1671" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1672" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Daubigny Turberville, of Oriel College; created <abbr>M.D.</abbr> at Oxford, 1660. He was a physician of some eminence, and, dying at Salisbury on the 21st April, 1696, aged eighty-five, he was buried in the cathedral, where his monument remains. Cassan, in his <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lives of the Bishops of Sarum</i>, part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 103, has reprinted an interesting account of Turberville, from the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Memoir of Bishop Seth Ward</i>, published in 1697, by <abbr>Dr.</abbr> Walter Pope. Turberville was born at Wayford, <abbr>co.</abbr> Somerset, in 1612, and became an expert oculist; and probably Pepys received great benefit from his advice, as his vision does not appear to have failed during the many years that he lived after discontinuing the Diary. The doctor died rich, and subsequently to his decease his sister Mary, inheriting all his prescriptions, and knowing how to use them, practised as an oculist in London with good reputation.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-102.xhtml#noteref-1672" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1673" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>To the Strand. <a href="../text/chapter-102.xhtml#noteref-1673" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1674" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>It is probable these stories, in ridicule of Clarendon, are nowhere recorded. Cardinal Jean Balue was the minister of Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span> of France. The reader will remember him in Sir <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Scott’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Quentin Durward</i>. He was confined for eleven years in an iron cage invented by himself in the Château de Loches, and died soon after he regained his liberty.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-103.xhtml#noteref-1674" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1675" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Gripes. It was a joke against Lord Cottington that whenever he was seriously ill he declared himself a Roman Catholic, when he was well again he returned to the Protestant faith. <a href="../text/chapter-103.xhtml#noteref-1675" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1676" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><dfn>Espinette</dfn> is the French term for a small harpsichord, at that time called in England a spinet. It was named from a fancied resemblance of its quill plectra to spines or thorns. <a href="../text/chapter-103.xhtml#noteref-1676" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1677" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Erysipelas. <a href="../text/chapter-103.xhtml#noteref-1677" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1678" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This passage has been frequently quoted as referring to Pepys’s small bookplate, with his initials <abbr class="name">S. P.</abbr> and two anchors and ropes entwined; but if looked at carefully with the further reference on the 27th, it will be seen that it merely describes the preparation of engravings of the four dockyards. <a href="../text/chapter-103.xhtml#noteref-1678" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1679" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>An account of these tubulous spectacles (“An easy help for decayed sight”) is given in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">The Philosophical Transactions</i>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 37, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 727⁠–⁠731 (Hutton’s Abridgment, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 266). See Diary, August 12th and 23rd, <abbr class="eoc">post.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-103.xhtml#noteref-1679" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1680" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The title of this book was, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Honour of the Merchant Taylors. Wherein is set forth the noble acts, valliant deeds, and heroick performances of Merchant Taylors in former ages; their honourable loves, and knightly adventures, their combating of foreign enemies and glorious successes in honour of the English nation: together with their pious acts and large benevolences, their building of publick structures, especially that of Blackwell Hall, to be a marketplace for the selling of woollen cloaths: Written by William Winstanley. <abbr>Lond.</abbr>, 1668</i>. <abbr>8vo.</abbr> With the head of Sir Ralph Blackwell, with a gold chain: arms of London on the right, and of the Merchant Taylors on the left.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-104.xhtml#noteref-1680" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1681" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>During the troubled reign of Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, the House of Commons gave parishioners the right of appointing lecturers at the various churches without the consent of rector or vicar, and this naturally gave rise to many quarrels. In the early period of the war between the king and the parliament, a course of sermons or lectures was projected in aid of the parliamentary cause. These lectures, which were preached by eminent Presbyterian divines at seven o’clock on the Sunday mornings, were commenced in the church of <abbr>St.</abbr> Mary Magdalen in Milk Street, but were soon afterwards removed to <abbr>St.</abbr> Giles’s, Cripplegate. After the Restoration the lectures were collected in four volumes, and published under the title of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Cripplegate Morning Exercises</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span> in 1661; <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span> in 1674; <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span> in 1682; and <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span> in 1690. In addition there were two volumes which form a supplement to the work, <abbr>viz.</abbr>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Morning Exercises methodized</i>, preached at <abbr>St.</abbr> Giles’s-in-the-Fields, edited by the <abbr>Rev.</abbr> Thomas Case in 1660, and the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Exercises against Popery</i>, preached in Southwark, and published in 1675 (see Denton’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Records of <abbr>St.</abbr> Giles’s, Cripplegate</i>, 1883, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 55⁠–⁠56). <a href="../text/chapter-104.xhtml#noteref-1681" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1682" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This refers to the letter on the affairs of the office which Pepys prepared, and respecting which, and the proceedings which grew out of it, so many references are made in future pages of the Diary. <a href="../text/chapter-104.xhtml#noteref-1682" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1683" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A mistake of Pepys’s. Colbert de Croissy, then in England, had himself been the French Plenipotentiary at Aix-la-Chapelle.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-104.xhtml#noteref-1683" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1684" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>In the Pepysian Library is a <abbr>MS.</abbr> (<abbr>No.</abbr> 2242), entitled, “Papers conteyning my addresse to his Royall Highnesse James Duke of Yorke, Lord High Admirall of England, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, by letter dated the 20th of August, 1668, humbly tendering him my advice touching the present State of the Office of the Navy, with his Royall Highness’s proceedings upon the same, and their result.” <a href="../text/chapter-104.xhtml#noteref-1684" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1685" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The set of portraits known as “King Charles’s Beauties,” formerly in Windsor Castle, but now at Hampton Court.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-104.xhtml#noteref-1685" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1686" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The popular name of John Fox’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Acts and Monuments</i>, first published in 1562⁠–⁠63. <a href="../text/chapter-104.xhtml#noteref-1686" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1687" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><abbr>i.e.</abbr>, intimacy. <a href="../text/chapter-104.xhtml#noteref-1687" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1688" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A copy of this letter is in the British Museum, <abbr>Harl. MS.</abbr> 6003. See July 24th, ante, and August 29th, <abbr class="eoc">post.</abbr> In the Pepysian Collection are the following: An Inquisition, by his Royal Highness the Duke of York, when Lord High Admiral of England, into the Management of the Navy, 1668, with his Regulations thereon, <abbr class="eoc">fol.</abbr> Also <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Pepys’s Defence of the same upon an Inquisition thereunto by Parliament, 1669, <abbr class="eoc">fol.</abbr>⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-104.xhtml#noteref-1688" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1689" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This is not the first learned horse of which we read. Shakespeare, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Love’s Labour’s Lost</i>, act <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>sc.</abbr> 2, mentions “the dancing horse,” and the commentators have added many particulars of Banks’s bay horse. <a href="../text/chapter-105.xhtml#noteref-1689" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1690" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Leviathan: or the matter, forme and power of a Commonwealth ecclesiasticall and civill</i>, by Thomas Hobbes of Malmesbury, first published in 1651. It was reprinted in 1680, with its old date. Hobbes’s complete works, English and Latin, were published by Sir William Molesworth in sixteen volumes <abbr>8vo.</abbr> between 1839 and 1845. <a href="../text/chapter-105.xhtml#noteref-1690" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1691" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>And that he might tell <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Pepys.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-105.xhtml#noteref-1691" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1692" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The title of the letter is as follows: “A Letter from a Gentleman to the Honourable <abbr class="name">Ed.</abbr> Howard, <abbr>Esq.</abbr>, occasioned by a Civiliz’d Epistle of <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Dryden’s before his Second Edition of his Indian Emperour. In the Savoy, printed by Thomas Newcomb, 1668.” The “Civiliz’d Epistle” was a caustic attack on Sir Robert Howard; and the Letter is signed, “Sir, your faithful and humble servant, <abbr class="name">R. F.</abbr>”⁠—<abbr>i.e.</abbr>, Richard Flecknoe. <a href="../text/chapter-105.xhtml#noteref-1692" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1693" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Guineas took their name from the gold brought from Guinea by the African Company in 1663, who, as an encouragement to bring over gold to be coined, were permitted by their charter from Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> to have their stamp of an elephant upon the coin. When first coined they were valued at 20<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr>, but were worth 30<abbr class="currency">s.</abbr> in 1695. There were likewise five-pound pieces, like the guinea, with the inscription upon the rim. <a href="../text/chapter-105.xhtml#noteref-1693" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1694" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>At the end of the year 1666 a Dutchman of the Prince of Orange’s party, named Kiviet, came over to England with proposals for embanking the river from the Temple to the Tower with brick, and was knighted by the king. He was introduced to Evelyn, whom he persuaded to join with him in a great undertaking for the making of bricks. On March 26th, 1667, the two went in search of brick-earth, and in September articles were drawn up between them for the purpose of proceeding in the manufacture. In April, 1668, Evelyn subscribed 50,000 bricks for the building of a college for the Royal Society, in addition to £50 given previously for the same purpose. No more information on the subject is given in Evelyn’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diary</i>. <a href="../text/chapter-105.xhtml#noteref-1694" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1695" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>In this part of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Diary</i> no entry occurs for thirteen days, though there are several pages left blank. During the interval Pepys went into the country, as he subsequently mentions his having been at Saxham, in Suffolk, during the king’s visit to Lord Crofts, which took place at this time (see October 23rd, <abbr>post</abbr>). He might also probably have gone to Impington to fetch his wife. The pages left blank were never filled up.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-106.xhtml#noteref-1695" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1696" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Penn’s first work, entitled, “Truth exalted, in a short but sure testimony against all those religions, faiths, and worships, that have been formed and followed, in the darkness of apostacy; and for that glorious light which is now risen, and shines forth, in the life and doctrine of the despised Quakers … by <abbr class="name">W.</abbr> Penn, whom divine love constrains, in holy contempt, to trample on Egypt’s glory, not fearing the King’s wrath, having beheld the Majesty of Him who is invisible.” London, 1668.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-106.xhtml#noteref-1696" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1697" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>It was probably for this payment that the tally was obtained, the loss of which caused Pepys so much anxiety. See November 26th, 1668. <a href="../text/chapter-106.xhtml#noteref-1697" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1698" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This useful instrument, used for copying maps, plans, drawings, <abbr>etc.</abbr> either of the same size, or larger or smaller than the originals, is now named a pantograph. <a href="../text/chapter-106.xhtml#noteref-1698" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1699" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>See note to February 4th, 1663⁠–⁠64. <a href="../text/chapter-107.xhtml#noteref-1699" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1700" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>In the margin here is the following: “Look back one leaf for my mistake.” <a href="../text/chapter-107.xhtml#noteref-1700" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1701" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Though our journalist prided himself not a little upon becoming possessed of a carriage, the acquisition was regarded with envy and jealousy by his enemies, as will appear by the following extract from the scurrilous pamphlet, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">A Hue and Cry after <abbr class="name">P.</abbr> and <abbr class="name">H.</abbr> and Plain Truth (or a Private Discourse between <abbr class="name">P.</abbr> and <abbr class="name">H.</abbr>)</i>, in which Pepys and Hewer are severely handled: “There is one thing more you must be mightily sorry for with all speed. Your presumption in your coach, in which you daily ride, as if you had been son and heir to the great Emperor Neptune, or as if you had been infallibly to have succeeded him in his government of the Ocean, all which was presumption in the highest degree. First, you had upon the fore part of your chariot, tempestuous waves and wrecks of ships; on your left hand, forts and great guns, and ships a-fighting; on your right hand was a fair harbour and galleys riding, with their flags and pennants spread, kindly saluting each other, just like P[epys] and H[ewer]. Behind it were high curled waves and ships a-sinking, and here and there an appearance of some bits of land.” <a href="../text/chapter-107.xhtml#noteref-1701" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1702" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>John Lanyon, agent of the Navy Commissioners at Plymouth. The cause of complaint appears to have been connected with his contract for Tangier. In 1668 a charge was made against Lanyon and Thomas Yeabsley that they had defrauded the king in the freighting of the ship <i epub:type="se:name.vessel.ship">Tiger</i> (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Calendar of State Papers</i>, 1668⁠–⁠69, <abbr>p.</abbr> 138). <a href="../text/chapter-107.xhtml#noteref-1702" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1703" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The cross of <abbr>St.</abbr> Andrew, like that of <abbr>St.</abbr> Patrick, is a saltire. The two, combined with the red cross of <abbr>St.</abbr> George, form the Union flag. <a href="../text/chapter-107.xhtml#noteref-1703" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1704" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Cadiz. <a href="../text/chapter-108.xhtml#noteref-1704" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1705" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Colonel Middleton. <a href="../text/chapter-108.xhtml#noteref-1705" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1706" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This seems to refer to the first form of the <abbr>Hon.</abbr> Robert Boyle’s hydrometer, which he described in a paper in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Philosophical Transactions</i> for June, 1675, under the title of a “New Essay instrument.” In this paper the author refers to a glass instrument exhibited many years before by himself, “consisting of a bubble furnished with a long and slender stem, which was to be put into several liquors to compare and estimate their specific gravity.” Boyle describes this glass bubble in a paper in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.journal">Philosophical Transactions</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>, <abbr>No.</abbr> 50, <abbr>p.</abbr> 1001, 1669, entitled, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.paper">The Weights of Water in Water with ordinary Balances and Weights</i>. <a href="../text/chapter-108.xhtml#noteref-1706" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1707" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This reminds us of the famous reply, <i xml:lang="fr">Laissez nous faire</i>, made to Colbert by the French merchants, whose interests he thought to promote by laws and regulations.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-108.xhtml#noteref-1707" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1708" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Strike topsails. <a href="../text/chapter-108.xhtml#noteref-1708" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1709" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="la">Musicæ Compendium</i>. By Réné Des Cartes, Amsterdam, 1617; rendered into English, London, 1653, <abbr class="eoc">4to.</abbr> The translator, whose name did not appear on the title, was William, Viscount Brouncker, Pepys’s colleague, who proved his knowledge of music by the performance. <a href="../text/chapter-108.xhtml#noteref-1709" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1710" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The celebrated John de Witt, Grand Pensionary of Holland, who, a few years afterwards, was massacred, with his brother Cornelius, by the Dutch mob, enraged at their opposition to the elevation of William of Orange to the Stadtholdership, when the States were overrun by the French army, and the Dutch fleets beaten at sea by the English. The murder of the De Witts forms one of the main incidents of Alexandre Dumas’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Black Tulip</i>. <a href="../text/chapter-108.xhtml#noteref-1710" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1711" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Henry Sheres accompanied Lord Sandwich in his embassy to Spain, and returned to England in September, 1667, bearing letters from the ambassador (see September 8th, 22nd, 27th). He was an officer in the Ordnance, and served under Lord Dartmouth at the demolition of the Mole at Tangier in 1683. He was knighted about 1684. He translated Polybius (2 <abbr>vols. 8vo.</abbr>, 1693), and also some of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Dialogues</i> of Lucian, included in the translation published in 1711 (3 <abbr>vols. 8vo.</abbr>). Pepys bequeathed him a ring, and he died about 1713. <a href="../text/chapter-108.xhtml#noteref-1711" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1712" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Entitled, “The Sandy Foundation Shaken; or those … doctrines of one God subsisting in three distinct and separate persons; the impossibility of God’s pardoning sinners without a plenary satisfaction, the justification of impure persons by an imputative righteousness, refuted from the authority of Scripture testimonies and right reason, <abbr class="eoc">etc.</abbr> London, 1668.” It caused him to be imprisoned in the Tower. “<abbr>Aug.</abbr> 4, 1669. Young Penn who wrote the blasphemous book is delivered to his father to be transported” (“Letter to Sir John Birkenhead, quoted by Bishop Kennett in his <abbr>MS.</abbr> Collections, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">lxxxix</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 477). <a href="../text/chapter-110.xhtml#noteref-1712" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1713" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>We may suppose that pews were by no means common at this time within consecrated walls, from the word being applied indifferently by Pepys to a box in a place of amusement, and two days afterwards to a seat at church. It would appear, from other authorities, that between 1646 and 1660 scarcely any pews had been erected; and Sir <abbr class="name">C.</abbr> Wren is known to have objected to their introduction into his London churches.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-110.xhtml#noteref-1713" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1714" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Pepys’s attachment to the fair sex extended even to a dead queen. The record of this royal salute on his natal day is very characteristic. The story told him in Westminster Abbey appears to have been correct; for Neale informs us (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">History of Westminster Abbey</i>, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 88) that near the south side of Henry <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>’s tomb there was formerly a wooden chest, or coffin, wherein part of the skeleton and parched body of Katherine de Valois, his queen (from the waist upwards), was to be seen. She was interred in January, 1457, in the Chapel of Our Lady, at the east end of this church; but when that building was pulled down by her grandson, Henry <span epub:type="z3998:Roman">VII</span>, her coffin was found to be decayed, and her body was taken up, and placed in a chest, near her first husband’s tomb. “There,” says Dart, “it hath ever since continued to be seen, the bones being firmly united, and thinly clothed with flesh, like scrapings of tanned leather.” This awful spectacle of frail mortality was at length removed from the public gaze into <abbr>St.</abbr> Nicholas’s Chapel, and finally deposited under the monument of Sir George Villiers, when the vault was made for the remains of Elizabeth Percy, Duchess of Northumberland, in December, 1776.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-110.xhtml#noteref-1714" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1715" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Glass House Alley, Whitefriars and Blackfriars, marked the site for some years. The Whitefriars Glass Works of <abbr>Messrs.</abbr> Powell and Sons are on the old site, now Temple Street. <a href="../text/chapter-110.xhtml#noteref-1715" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1716" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> wrote to his sister (Henrietta, Duchess of Orleans), on March 7th, 1669: “I am not sorry that Sir <abbr class="name">Will.</abbr> Coventry has given me this good occasion by sending my Lord of Buckingham a challenge to turne him out of the Councill. I do intend to turn him allso out of the Treasury. The truth of it is, he has been a troublesome man in both places and I am well rid of him” (Julia Cartwright’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Madame</i>, 1894, <abbr>p.</abbr> 283). <a href="../text/chapter-111.xhtml#noteref-1716" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1717" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Brick Tower stands on the northern wall, a little to the west of Martin tower, with which it communicates by a secret passage. It was the residence of the Master of the Ordnance, and Raleigh was lodged here for a time. <a href="../text/chapter-111.xhtml#noteref-1717" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1718" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Charles Porter “was the son of a prebend[ary] in Norwich, and a ’prentice boy in the city in the rebellious times. When the committee house was blown up, he was very active in that rising, and after the soldiers came and dispersed the rout, he, as a rat among joint stools, shifted to and fro among the shambles, and had forty pistols shot at him by the troopers that rode after him to kill him [24th April, 1648]. In that distress he had the presence of mind to catch up a little child that, during the rout, was frighted, and stood crying in the streets, and, unobserved by the troopers, ran away with it. The people opened a way for him, saying, ‘Make room for the poor child.’ Thus he got off, and while search was made for him in the marketplace, got into the Yarmouth ferry, and at Yarmouth took ship and went to Holland. … In Holland he trailed a pike, and was in several actions as a common soldier. At length he kept a cavalier eating-house; but, his customers being needy, he soon broke, and came for England, and being a genteel youth, was taken in among the chancery clerks, and got to be under a master. … His industry was great; and he had an acquired dexterity and skill in the forms of the court; and although he was a bon companion, and followed much the bottle, yet he made such dispatches as satisfied his clients, especially the clerks, who knew where to find him. His person was florid, and speech prompt and articulate. But his vices, in the way of women and the bottle, were so ungoverned, as brought him to a morsel. … When the Lord Keeper North had the Seal, who from an early acquaintance had a kindness for him which was well known, and also that he was well heard, as they call it, business flowed in to him very fast, and yet he could scarce keep himself at liberty to follow his business. … At the Revolution, when his interest fell from, and his debts began to fall upon him, he was at his wits’ end. … His character for fidelity, loyalty, and facetious conversation was without exception”⁠—Roger North’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Lives of the Norths</i> (Lord Keeper Guilford), <abbr>ed.</abbr> Jessopp, <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">i</span>, <abbr>pp.</abbr> 381⁠–⁠2. He was originally made Lord Chancellor of Ireland in the reign of James <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, during the viceroyalty of Lord Clarendon, 1686, when he was knighted. “He was,” says Burnet, “a man of ready wit, and being poor was thought a person fit to be made a tool of. When Clarendon was recalled, Porter was also displaced, and Fitton was made chancellor, a man who knew no other law than the king’s pleasure” (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Own Time</i>). Sir Charles Porter was again made Lord Chancellor of Ireland in 1690, and in this same year he acted as one of the Lords Justices. This note of Lord Braybrooke’s is retained and added to, but the reference may after all be to another Charles Porter. See <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 122, and <abbr>vol.</abbr> <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>, <abbr>p.</abbr> 98. <a href="../text/chapter-111.xhtml#noteref-1718" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1719" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The old palace at Greenwich had just been pulled down, and a new building commenced by Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, only one wing of which was completed, at the expense of £36,000, under the auspices of Webb, Inigo Jones’s kinsman and executor. In 1694 the unfinished edifice was granted by William and Mary to trustees for the use and service of a Naval Hospital; and it has been repeatedly enlarged and improved till it has arrived at its present splendour.⁠—<abbr class="name">B.</abbr> <a href="../text/chapter-111.xhtml#noteref-1719" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1720" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Kits-Cotty House, a cromlech in Aylesford parish, Kent, on a hillside adjacent to the river Medway, three and a half miles <abbr class="compass">N.</abbr> by <abbr class="compass">W.</abbr> of Maidstone. It consists of three upright stones and an overlying one, and forms a small chamber open in front. It is supposed to have been the centre of a group of monuments indicating the burial-place of the Belgian settlers in this part of Britain. Other stones of a similar character exist in the neighbourhood. <a href="../text/chapter-111.xhtml#noteref-1720" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1721" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Princess Mary, afterwards Queen of England. <a href="../text/chapter-112.xhtml#noteref-1721" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1722" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>An <dfn>olio</dfn> is a mixed dish of meat and vegetables, and, secondarily, mixture or medley. <a href="../text/chapter-112.xhtml#noteref-1722" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1723" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>From Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span>. See April 28th. <a href="../text/chapter-112.xhtml#noteref-1723" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1724" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The work here mentioned is a bitter satire against the Court Rome, written in Italian, and attributed to Gregorio Leti. It was first printed in 1667, without the name or place of printer, but it is from the press of the Elzevirs. The book obtained by Pepys was probably the anonymous English translation, “<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="it">Il Nipotismo di Roma</i>: or the history of the Popes nephews from the time of Sixtus the <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> to the death the last Pope Alexander the <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>. In two parts. Written originally Italian in the year 1667 and Englished by <abbr class="name">W. A.</abbr> London, 1669” <abbr>8vo.</abbr> From this work the word Nepotism is derived, and is applied to the bad practice of statesmen, when in power, providing lucrative places for their relations. <a href="../text/chapter-112.xhtml#noteref-1724" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li id="note-1725" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Clarendon; then an exile in France. <a href="../text/chapter-112.xhtml#noteref-1725" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
